.\" Manpage for bitcoin-descriptor(1) — BIP-380 descriptors.
.TH BITCOIN-DESCRIPTOR 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-descriptor \- BIP-380 output script descriptors

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin descriptor checksum
.I descriptor_body
.br
.B bitcoin descriptor verify
.I descriptor_with_checksum
.br
.B bitcoin descriptor derive
.I descriptor
.I index
.br
.B bitcoin descriptor wallet
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin descriptor help

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin descriptor
takes no top-level flags. Per-subcommand semantics are documented
under SUBCOMMANDS below. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin descriptor
implements the BIP-380 output script descriptor language: a
declarative way to describe a set of scripts (and the keys that
satisfy them) from a single string. Wallet ledger entries, PSBT
input metadata, and the
.B bitcoin wallet
verb all consume descriptors.

The checksum (BIP-380 §Checksum) is an 8-character polymod-based
suffix after a
.B #
separator. The encoder, verifier, deriver, and wallet-emit
subcommands all preserve or compute it as required by the spec.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "checksum " "descriptor_body"
Append a BIP-380 checksum. If the input already ends in
.BR # ", "
the trailing 8-character checksum is replaced; otherwise a
checksum is appended.
.TP
.BI "verify " "descriptor"
Verify a descriptor's embedded checksum. Exits 0 on success;
non-zero with a
.B warn
line on mismatch.
.TP
.BI "derive " "descriptor index"
Instantiate the
.B *
placeholder in
.I descriptor
with
.I index
and emit the resulting address. Supported types:
.BR wpkh() " (bech32 segwit v0),"
.BR pkh() " (legacy P2PKH '1...'), "
.BR sh(wpkh()) " (P2SH-nested segwit '3...')."
.BR tr() " and " combo()
return a clear "not yet implemented" error.
.TP
.BI "wallet " "name"
Emit a checksummed
.BI wpkh( xpub /0/* )
descriptor for the existing wallet
.IR name .
Reads the seed via
.B secret get
.IB name /seed
and derives the
.B m/84h/0h/0h
account xpub via the same pipeline
.B bitcoin wallet derive
uses.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (or, for
.BR verify ,
checksum is valid).
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error or checksum mismatch. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/
Wallet repository the
.B wallet
subcommand reads from.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
None specific. Inherits
.B SELF_DEBUG
and
.B SELF_QUIET
from the dispatcher.

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-380 (Output Script Descriptors General Operation), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0380.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip13 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bech32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0 as part of FEAT-009. Man page
added in 1.23.0 (FEAT-041).

In a future release the verb will be renamed to
.B bitcoin bip380
(FEAT-035, target 1.23.0+);
.B descriptor
will remain as a deprecated alias for one release after the
rename.
