.\" Manpage for bitcoin-tax(1) — tax-label vocabulary (FEAT-038)
.\" and the German private-disposal report (FEAT-039).
.TH BITCOIN-TAX 1 "2026-05-28" "bitcoin 1.25.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-tax \- tax-label vocabulary and German private-disposal reporting

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin tax label
.I wallet
.I outpoint
.B --as
.I category
.RI [ "--note text" ]
.br
.B bitcoin tax report-de
.I wallet
.B --year
.I YYYY
.RI [ "--out dir" ]
.RI [ --all-wallets ]
.RI [ --strict-lending ]
.RI [ "--giver-basis eur" ]
.br
.B bitcoin tax help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin tax
is the tax-workflow entry point. The
.B label
verb is a discoverable shorthand for
.BR "bitcoin wallet label" ;
.B report-de
generates the FIFO-based German private-disposal report (Anlage SO,
\(sc\(sc 22 / 23 EStG) from the wallet's labels and transaction cache,
valued by the local
.BR bitcoin-price (1)
cache. The report makes
.B no
network call \(em prices come from the cache only, so the same wallet
and cache produce byte-identical output every run.

The
.B label
verb persists a category from the closed FEAT-038 taxonomy
against a wallet outpoint (UTXO, transaction, or address). The
13 valid categories are
.BR self-transfer ,
.BR income ,
.BR gift-in ,
.BR gift-out ,
.BR purchase ,
.BR sale ,
.BR spend ,
.BR fee ,
.BR lending-out ,
.BR lending-in ,
.BR loss-claim ,
.BR channel-open ,
.BR channel-close .

For free-form annotations (counterparty names, invoice IDs)
that aren't part of the tax taxonomy, use
.BR "bitcoin wallet label <wallet> <outpoint> --free-text <text>"
instead.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "--as " "category"
The tax category to tag the outpoint with. Must be one of the
13 categories listed above.
.TP
.BI "--note " "text"
Optional free-text annotation stored alongside the tax category
(e.g.
.IR "kraken Q1 2025" ).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "label " "wallet outpoint" " --as " category " [--note " text "]"
Persist a tax category on the outpoint. Byte-identical to
.BR "bitcoin wallet label <wallet> <outpoint> --tax <category>"
\(em the
.B tax
prefix exists purely for discoverability of the tax workflow.
.TP
.BI "report-de " "wallet" " --year " YYYY " [options]"
Generate the German private-disposal report for the given tax
.IR year .
Walks every acquisition chronologically and matches each disposal
against the oldest lots (FIFO / Fifo-Methode). For each popped lot it
computes the holding period, the Spekulationsfrist
.RB ( "\(sc 23 (1) Nr. 2 EStG" :
held > 365 days is tax-free, otherwise taxable), the EUR cost basis and
proceeds (both from the price cache), and the gain. A
.B loss-claim
is a disposal at 0 EUR proceeds whose loss feeds Verlustverrechnung
.RB ( "\(sc 23 (3) S. 7 EStG" ).
.B income
events are reported separately as
.RB "\(sc 22 EStG"
income. Lots held in
.BR self-transfer / channel-open
form are not disposals; their basis is preserved (and, under
.BR --all-wallets ,
carried to the receiving wallet). Writes four files under
.IR <out>/<wallet>-<year>/
(or
.I <out>/all-wallets-<year>/
with
.BR --all-wallets ).
.TP
.B help
List the closed taxonomy and the report verb.

.SH "REPORT-DE OPTIONS"
.TP
.BI "--year " YYYY
Tax year to report. Required. Only disposals dated in this year appear
in the output; acquisitions from any year build the FIFO basis.
.TP
.BI "--out " dir
Output directory (default the current directory). The report is written
to a
.IB dir / <wallet> - <year>
subdirectory.
.TP
.B --all-wallets
Aggregate across every wallet under the data root. A
.B self-transfer
to another aggregated wallet moves the lot (basis + acquisition date
preserved) instead of being treated as a disposal, so a coin moved
A\(->B\(->C and then sold from C traces back to its original
acquisition in A.
.TP
.B --strict-lending
Treat
.B lending-out
as a disposal at fair market value and the returned coins
.RB ( lending-in )
as a fresh acquisition \(em the conservative reading of recent BFH
guidance. The default treats lending as collateral (no disposal). The
choice is recorded in
.IR narrative.md .
.TP
.BI "--giver-basis " eur
For
.B gift-in
acquisitions, the giver's known EUR cost basis (else basis is 0).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Missing required argument (e.g.
.BR --year ),
or unknown subcommand / flag.
.TP
.B 4
No such wallet, or no wallets found under the data root.
.TP
.B 5
A required tool
.RB ( jq )
is not installed.
.TP
.B 6
Category not in the closed taxonomy (error names the valid set).
.TP
.B \(>=1
Other errors propagate from
.B wallet label
unchanged.

.SH FILES
.TP
.IB <wallet-repo>/labels/utxo
TSV store for per-UTXO labels. With FEAT-038, rows tagged via
.B --as
have three columns:
.IB outpoint TAB category TAB note .
Legacy two-column rows (free-text only) remain valid and read
correctly.
.TP
.IB <wallet-repo>/labels/tx
TSV store for per-transaction labels, same format.
.TP
.IB <wallet-repo>/transactions/ <txid> .json
Cached decoded transactions (from
.BR "bitcoin wallet index" )
that
.B report-de
reads for amounts and block timestamps. Never fetched during a report.
.TP
.IB <out>/<wallet>-<year>/disposals.csv
The record of data: one row per popped lot, columns
.IR date_acquired ", " date_disposed ", " amount_btc ", " basis_eur ", " proceeds_eur ", " holding_days ", " gain_eur ", " taxable ", " category ", " acquisition_txid:vout ", " disposal_txid:vout ", " price_source_acq ", " price_source_disp .
.TP
.IB <out>/<wallet>-<year>/income.csv
\(sc 22 EStG income events (mining / staking / airdrop) at fair market
value on receipt.
.TP
.IB <out>/<wallet>-<year>/summary.md
Anlage-SO-shaped summary: the \(sc 23 totals mapped to Zeile 41\(en44,
the Freigrenze condition
.RB ( "\(sc 23 (3) S. 5 EStG" :
gains stay tax-free only if the total \(sc 23 gain across all sources is
\(<= 600 EUR), and a signature line.
.TP
.IB <out>/<wallet>-<year>/narrative.md
Plain-language record of the assumptions made (FIFO, the lending mode,
the price source) and what the filer must still check by hand.
.PP
Every output file opens with the same non-removable disclaimer: the
report is not tax advice, the software carries no warranty, and the
filer is responsible for accuracy.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1).
The wallet's
.B labels/
directory lives under
.IB $XDG_DATA_HOME /bitcoin/wallets/ <name> /labels/ .
.TP
.B BITCOIN_PRICE_CACHE
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin-price (1).
The BTC/EUR cache
.B report-de
reads (default
.IR ~/.bitcoin/cache/price/btc-eur.tsv ).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1),
.BR bitcoin-price (1)

.SH HISTORY
.B label
introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 with the 13-category FEAT-038 taxonomy.
.B report-de
added in 1.25.0 (FEAT-039) on top of the FEAT-040 price oracle. The
taxonomy is expected to remain stable so historical labels keep
reporting correctly.
