.\" Manpage for bitcoin-utxo(1) — UTXO object verb (FEAT-037).
.TH BITCOIN-UTXO 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.23.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-utxo \- UTXO as a first-class object verb

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin utxo ls
.I wallet
.RI [ --include-frozen ]
.br
.B bitcoin utxo freeze
.I wallet
.I txid:vout
.RI [ "--reason text" ]
.br
.B bitcoin utxo unfreeze
.I wallet
.I txid:vout
.br
.B bitcoin utxo help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin utxo
exposes per-wallet unspent transaction outputs as a noun. Lets
the operator list, freeze, and unfreeze UTXOs by hand — the
coin-control surface Sparrow Wallet renders as a checkbox list,
applied to the `bitcoin` wallet's git-backed model.

Frozen UTXOs are excluded from
.B bitcoin utxo ls
by default
.RI ( --include-frozen
keeps them in the output) and will be refused by
.B bitcoin tx build
once the FEAT-036 follow-up integration lands.

This release ships the
.BR ls ,
.BR freeze ,
.B unfreeze
subcommands.
.B utxo select
(standalone selection emitter with
.BR --strategy
greedy / branch-and-bound) and the
.B wallet index
deprecation alias follow in a separate PR per the
ROADMAP-1.23.0 PR-sequencing.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --include-frozen
On
.BR ls ,
keep frozen rows in the output (marked with
.B Y
in the
.B frozen
column). Default excludes them entirely.
.TP
.BI "--reason " text
On
.BR freeze ,
record a human-readable reason alongside the outpoint
(e.g.
.IR "KYC concern" ,
.IR "CoinJoin segregation" ).
Stored in the
.B reason
column of
.IR frozen.tsv .
Tabs and newlines in
.I text
are rejected (storage is TSV).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "ls " "wallet" " [--include-frozen]"
Walk
.IR wallet 's
addresses ledger, query the active backend (see
.BR bitcoin-backend (1))
for unspent outputs at each address, and emit one TSV line per
UTXO with columns
.BR txid ", " vout ", " address ", " amount_sat ", " frozen .
The
.B frozen
column is
.B Y
when the row is in
.IR <wallet-repo>/frozen.tsv ;
.B N
otherwise. Without
.BR --include-frozen ,
.B Y
rows are filtered out.
.TP
.BI "freeze " "wallet outpoint" " [--reason " text "]"
Record
.I outpoint
(format:
.IR <txid>:<vout> )
in
.IR <wallet-repo>/frozen.tsv .
Three-column TSV: outpoint, reason, Unix timestamp.
Idempotent on the same outpoint \(em the row is overwritten,
not duplicated.
.TP
.BI "unfreeze " "wallet outpoint"
Remove
.I outpoint
from
.IR <wallet-repo>/frozen.tsv .
No-op if the outpoint isn't currently frozen.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Missing required argument, or unknown subcommand / flag.
.TP
.B 3
Outpoint shape rejected (not
.IR <txid>:<vout> ).
.TP
.B 4
.B freeze :
reason contained tabs / newlines.
.B ls :
missing addresses ledger.
.TP
.B 5
.B freeze " / " unfreeze :
no such wallet.
.B ls :
no addresses ledger.
.TP
.B 6
.B freeze " / " unfreeze :
git commit failed.

.SH FILES
.TP
.IB <wallet-repo>/frozen.tsv
Per-wallet frozen-UTXO ledger. Three-column TSV:
.BR outpoint ", " reason ", " unix-timestamp .
Tracked in the wallet's git repository (per FEAT-011) so
.B bitcoin wallet push
and
.B pull
carry the frozen state across machines.
.TP
.IB <wallet-repo>/addresses
Read by
.B utxo ls
to enumerate addresses for backend queries.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1).
The wallet's repo (including
.IR frozen.tsv )
lives under
.IB $XDG_DATA_HOME /bitcoin/wallets/ <name> /.
.TP
.B BITCOIN_BACKEND
Forwarded to
.BR bitcoin-backend (1)
during
.B utxo ls
to resolve unspent outputs per address.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1),
.BR bitcoin-tx (1),
.BR bitcoin-backend (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 (FEAT-037). This release
ships the
.BR ls / freeze / unfreeze
surface; the
.B utxo select
verb (with greedy and branch-and-bound strategies), the
.B tx build
refuse-frozen integration, and the
.B wallet index
deprecation alias follow in a separate PR.
