.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip350(1) — BIP-350 bech32m encoding.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP350 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.23.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip350 \- bech32m string encoding (BIP-350)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip350
.B encode
.I hrp
.I data
.br
.B bitcoin bip350
.B decode
.I string
.br
.B bitcoin bip350
.B verify
.I string
.br
.B bitcoin bip350 help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip350
implements the bech32m variant of BIP-173 introduced by BIP-350.
Per BIP-350 §Motivation, the only change from bech32 is the
polymod's final XOR constant
.RB ( 0x2bc830a3
instead of
.BR 1 );
the change fixes a property where certain insertion/deletion
mistakes weren't caught by the original bech32 checksum.
bech32m is required for SegWit v1+ (Taproot) addresses.

The CLI surface mirrors
.BR bitcoin-bip173 (1)
exactly:
.BR encode ,
.BR decode ,
.BR verify .
A bech32m string is incompatible with the bech32 checksum and
vice-versa; the two plugins each reject the other's output.

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin bip350
takes no top-level flags. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "encode " "hrp data"
Emit a bech32m string from an explicit HRP (1\-83 chars,
printable ASCII, all-lowercase or all-uppercase) and a
.I data
part of characters drawn from the bech32 charset. The 6-char
bech32m checksum is computed and appended.
.TP
.BI "decode " string
Decode a bech32m string. Validates the bech32m checksum, prints
the HRP and each 5-bit data value. Rejects bech32 (BIP-173)
checksums.
.TP
.BI "verify " string
Verify the bech32m checksum of
.I string
without producing data. Exits 0 on success; rejects bech32
strings.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Same exit-code scheme as
.BR bitcoin-bip173 (1).

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enables shell trace
.RB ( "set -vx" ).
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppresses info-level logging.

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-350 (Bech32m format for v1+ witness addresses), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0350.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip173 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bech32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 (FEAT-035 Stream C). The
deprecated
.B bitcoin bech32 -m
verb covers the same encoding via a different CLI shape and
will alias here in a subsequent release.
