.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip341(1) — Taproot tweak and P2TR address (BIP-341).
.TH BITCOIN-BIP341 1 "2026-05-28" "bitcoin 1.26.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip341 \- Taproot output-key tweak and P2TR address (BIP-341)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip341 tweak
.I internal-x-hex
.RI [ merkle-root-hex ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip341 address
.I internal-x-hex
.RI [ --mainnet | --testnet | --regtest ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip341 help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip341
implements BIP-341 Taproot output-key derivation. Given an internal
x-only key
.I P
and an optional merkle root
.IR m ,
it computes the tweaked output key
.BR "Q = P + t \(mu G" ,
where
.B t = tagged_hash("TapTweak", P || m).
Pass no
.I merkle-root-hex
for the BIP-86 key-path-only case
.RB ( m
is empty); pass a 32-byte merkle root for script-path-capable outputs.

The
.B address
subcommand wraps the result in a BIP-350 bech32m envelope with
witness version 1, producing a P2TR address
.RB ( bc1p... ,
.BR tb1p... ,
or
.BR bcrt1p... ).

Per the repo's no-shared-library convention (CLAUDE.md \(sc 4 / \(sc 5),
this plugin owns its own secp256k1 affine arithmetic. bech32m
encoding is delegated to
.BR bitcoin-bip350 (1)
via the sibling-libexec convention.

.SH OPTIONS
The
.B address
subcommand accepts a network selector:
.BR --mainnet ,
.BR --testnet ,
.BR --regtest .
Default is
.BR --mainnet .
Other subcommands take no flags.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "tweak " "internal-x-hex " [ merkle-root-hex ]
Print the 32-byte tweaked output x-only key.
Errors if the internal key is not a valid x-coordinate of any
secp256k1 point (exit code 4) or if the tweaked point is at
infinity (exit code 5).
.TP
.BI "address " "internal-x-hex " [ "--mainnet|--testnet|--regtest" ]
Print the P2TR bech32m address. Defaults to
.B --mainnet
(HRP
.IR bc );
.B --testnet
gives
.IR tb ;
.B --regtest
gives
.IR bcrt .

.SH EXAMPLES
BIP-86 abandon-mnemonic reference (m/86\(fmh/0\(fmh/0\(fmh/0/0):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ bitcoin bip341 address \\
    CC8A4BC64D897BDDC5FBC2F670F7A8BA0B386779106CF1223C6FC5D7CD6FC115
bc1p5cyxnuxmeuwuvkwfem96lqzszd02n6xdcjrs20cac6yqjjwudpxqkedrcr
.fi
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Missing argument or unknown subcommand / flag.
.TP
.B 3
Malformed input (e.g.
.I internal-x-hex
not 32 bytes).
.TP
.B 4
Internal key is not a valid x-coordinate of any secp256k1 point.
.TP
.B 5
Tweaked point is at infinity (cryptographically impossible for honest inputs).

.SH FILES
.TP
.IB share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0341.mediawiki
Local copy of BIP-341.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
If set, emit
.B debug -
trace lines to stderr.
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
If set, suppress informational
.B info -
lines.
.TP
.B SELF_LIBEXEC
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1);
sibling plugins (e.g.
.BR bip350 )
are located via
.IB $SELF_LIBEXEC /bitcoin/ .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip340 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip350 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip380 (1)

.SH STANDARDS
BIP-341 \(em Taproot: SegWit version 1 spending rules:
<https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki>.
BIP-86 \(em Key Derivation for Single Key P2TR Outputs:
<https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0086.mediawiki>.

.SH HISTORY
Introduced in bitcoin 1.26.0 (FEAT-007). Script-path (tapleaf
hashing per BIP-342) is not yet implemented; the merkle-root
argument is accepted but the plugin does not synthesise tap-leaves
for you.
