.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip380(1) — BIP-380 output script descriptors.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP380 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.23.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip380 \- BIP-380 output script descriptors

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip380 checksum
.I descriptor_body
.br
.B bitcoin bip380 verify
.I descriptor_with_checksum
.br
.B bitcoin bip380 derive
.I descriptor
.I index
.br
.B bitcoin bip380 help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip380
implements the BIP-380 output script descriptor language:
the 8-character polymod checksum suffix, descriptor checksum
verification, and address derivation by instantiating the
.B *
placeholder.

Per CLAUDE.md §4 no-shared-library, this plugin owns its own
copies of
.B hash160
and
.B convertbits
helpers and shells out to sibling plugins
.RB ( bip13
for base58check,
.B bip32
for HD derivation,
.B bip173
for bech32) for primitives that already have a canonical home.

The wallet-touching verb
.B bitcoin descriptor wallet <name>
\(em which reads the BIP-39 seed from
.BR secret (1)
and derives the
.B m/84h/0h/0h
xpub for an existing wallet \(em remains in
.BR bitcoin (1)
because it integrates wallet state and the
.B secret
sibling tool. A future PR may re-home it under
.B bitcoin wallet descriptor
for cleaner separation.

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin bip380
takes no top-level flags. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "checksum " "descriptor_body"
Append a BIP-380 §Checksum (8 chars from the bech32 charset)
after a
.B #
separator. If the input already ends in
.BR # ", "
the existing 8-character checksum is replaced rather than
duplicated.
.TP
.BI "verify " "descriptor"
Verify a descriptor's embedded checksum. Exits 0 on success;
non-zero with a
.B warn
line on mismatch.
.TP
.BI "derive " "descriptor index"
Instantiate the
.B *
placeholder in
.I descriptor
with
.I index
and emit the resulting address. Supported descriptor functions:
.BR wpkh() " (bech32 segwit v0, via " bitcoin-bip173 (1) "), "
.BR pkh() " (legacy P2PKH '1...'), "
.BR sh(wpkh()) " (P2SH-nested segwit '3...')."
.BR tr() " and " combo()
return a clear "not yet implemented" error.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (or, for
.BR verify ,
checksum is valid).
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error: missing argument, malformed body, unknown
descriptor function, checksum mismatch. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_LIBEXEC
Required when invoking
.B derive
on a
.BR wpkh()
descriptor: the plugin shells out to sibling
.BR bip13 ", " bip32 ", and " bip173
plugins for base58check, HD derivation, and bech32 encoding.
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1)
when invoked via the dispatcher.

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-380 (Output Script Descriptors, General Operation), shipped
at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0380.mediawiki .
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-381 (Non-segwit output script descriptors), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0381.mediawiki .
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-386 (tr() output script descriptors), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0386.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip13 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip173 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 (FEAT-035 Stream B), extracted
from
.B bin/bitcoin
where the BIP-380 logic had landed in 1.4.0 (FEAT-009) and 1.18.0
(FEAT-026). The legacy
.B bitcoin descriptor checksum
/
.B verify
/
.B derive
verbs continue to work as deprecated aliases until 1.24.0.
.B bitcoin descriptor wallet
is not deprecated \(em it stays in
.BR bitcoin (1)
as a wallet-touching helper.
