.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip174(1) — BIP-174 PSBT.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP174 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.23.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip174 \- BIP-174 partially-signed Bitcoin transactions

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip174 decode
.br
.B bitcoin bip174 encode
.br
.B bitcoin bip174 sign
.I privkey_hex
.br
.B bitcoin bip174 finalize
.br
.B bitcoin bip174 extract
.br
.B bitcoin bip174 help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip174
implements the BIP-174 Partially Signed Bitcoin Transaction
format end-to-end: decode hex PSBTs to a tab-separated record
form, re-encode them back to hex, sign v0 P2WPKH inputs, run the
finaliser, and extract the broadcastable raw transaction.

PSBT records are documented in BIP-174 as
.B "(section, type, key, value)"
tuples; this plugin's
.B decode
output mirrors that shape line-by-line so any line-oriented
toolchain (awk, sed,
.BR jq -shaped scripts) can manipulate PSBTs without parsing the
binary format.

This plugin is the canonical home for PSBT primitives as of
1.23.0 (FEAT-035 Stream D). The previous
.B bitcoin psbt
verb continues to work as a deprecated alias that emits one
.B warn
line and forwards here; removal target is 1.24.0.

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin bip174
takes no top-level flags. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B decode
Read a PSBT (hex) from stdin and emit one TSV line per key-value
record:
.B section=<n> type=<hex> key=<hex> value=<hex> .
.TP
.B encode
Read TSV records (the shape
.B decode
emits) from stdin and emit a hex PSBT. Tracks section bumps and
inserts
.B 0x00
terminators between sections; one final
.B 0x00
closes the last section.
.TP
.BI "sign " "privkey_hex"
Read a PSBT (hex) from stdin and sign every v0 P2WPKH input whose
.B WITNESS_UTXO scriptPubKey
matches
.B HASH160(pubkey of <privkey>) .
Re-emits the PSBT with
.B PSBT_IN_PARTIAL_SIG
records (BIP-174 type 0x02) inserted per signed input.
.I privkey_hex
is a 32-byte hex secret key.
.B SIGHASH_ALL
only; ECDSA via
.B openssl pkeyutl
over secp256k1; signatures are BIP-66 low-S canonicalised.
.TP
.B finalize
Read a PSBT from stdin, promote every input's first
.B PSBT_IN_PARTIAL_SIG
(type 0x02) to a finalised witness via
.B PSBT_IN_FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS
(type 0x08), and re-emit. Per BIP-174 §Finalizer, finalised
inputs keep only
.BR WITNESS_UTXO " and " FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS .
Inputs without a partial sig pass through unfinalised.
.TP
.B extract
Read a finalised PSBT from stdin and emit the broadcastable
BIP-141 / BIP-144 segwit raw tx as hex. Refuses if any input
lacks
.B FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS .

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error: malformed PSBT, unsigned input on
.BR extract ,
unknown script type on
.BR sign , etc.
Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enables shell trace
.RB ( "set -vx" ).
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppresses info-level logging.

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-174 (Partially Signed Bitcoin Transaction Format), shipped
at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0174.mediawiki .
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-141 (Segregated Witness consensus layer) and BIP-144 (segwit
transaction serialisation), consumed by the
.B extract
output format.
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-66 (Strict DER signatures), enforced on the low-S
canonicalisation in
.BR sign .
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-143 (Transaction signature verification for v0 witness
program), implemented by the sighash computation in
.BR sign .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip173 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1),
.BR bitcoin-psbt (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 (FEAT-035 Stream D),
extracted verbatim from the
.B command:psbt
block in
.BR bin/bitcoin .
The legacy
.B bitcoin psbt
verb continues to work as a deprecated alias until 1.24.0. The
.B tx
object verb (FEAT-036) will compose these primitives into
higher-level wallet flows in a future release.
