.\" Manpage for bitcoin-daemon(1) — bitcoind lifecycle.
.TH BITCOIN-DAEMON 1 "2026-05-23" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-daemon \- install, enable, disable, start, stop, monitor, and inspect the local bitcoind

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B install
.RI [ "--from " source "] [" "--tag " v "] [" "--prefix " path ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B enable
.RI [ --system " | " --user ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B disable
.RI [ --user " | " --system ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B start
.RI [ --user " | " --system ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B stop
.RI [ --user " | " --system ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B monitor
.RI [ --user " | " --system ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon
.RI [ options ]
.B space
.RI [ --user " | " --system ]
.br
.B bitcoin daemon help
.RI [ command ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin daemon
provides a thin lifecycle wrapper over the Bitcoin Core
.BR bitcoind (1)
process: start it, stop it, watch its progress, and report how
much disk the chainstate is consuming. The plugin manages
.BR bitcoind
as a local long-running process and, since 1.22.0 (FEAT-034), can
install a service unit so the daemon survives reboots. It does not
run multiple instances side-by-side.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d
Enable debug output (shell trace).
.TP
.B -q
Quiet mode (suppress info logging).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BR install " [" "--from " source "] [" "--tag " v "] [" "--prefix " path ]
Install the
.B bitcoind
binary. The default
.I source
is chosen from
.B account platform :
.B brew
on macOS (falling back to
.BR macports ),
.B apt
on Debian / Ubuntu / PureOS,
.B apk
on Alpine, and
.B source
elsewhere.
.B --from
overrides it; accepted values are
.BR brew ,
.BR macports ,
.BR apt ,
.BR apk ,
.BR source ,
and
.BR rpk .
.B --tag
and
.B --prefix
apply only to
.BR "--from source" ,
which clones and builds Bitcoin Core from
.I github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin
with
.B --disable-wallet
(this tool is the wallet).
.B --from rpk
errors until the
.I nostra124/bitcoind
rpk package ships (see
.IR docs/rpk-bitcoind.md ).
On success the installed
.B bitcoind --version
is printed.
.TP
.BR enable " [" --system " | " --user ]
Render a service unit from the templates under
.I share/bitcoin/units/
.RB ( bitcoind.service
for systemd,
.B bitcoind.plist
for launchd), install it, and bring
.B bitcoind
up so it survives reboots.
.B --system
(default) installs a system-wide service running as a dedicated
.B bitcoin
account (created on first enable if missing) with its data dir
under
.IR /var/lib/bitcoin .
It needs root (or
.BR sudo ).
.B --user
is the explicit opt-in for a rootless per-user service with no root
.RB ( "systemctl --user"
on Linux,
.B launchctl bootstrap gui/$UID
on macOS) \(em for personal, educational, macOS, or CI use.
The
.BR @BITCOIND@ ", " @DATADIR@ ", and " @USER@
template markers are substituted at enable time;
.B @BITCOIND@
resolves via
.B command -v bitcoind
so a missing binary surfaces here, not later in the journal.
Idempotent. Errors with a pointer to
.B bitcoin daemon install
when no
.B bitcoind
is on PATH.
.TP
.BR disable " [" --user " | " --system ]
Tear the service down and remove its unit file. The data
directory is preserved (an explicit purge verb is left for a
future release).
.TP
.BR start " [" --user " | " --system ]
Start the
.B bitcoind
service installed by
.BR enable :
.B systemctl
.RI [ --user ]
.B start bitcoind
on Linux,
.B launchctl kickstart
on macOS.
.TP
.BR stop " [" --user " | " --system ]
Stop the service:
.B systemctl
.RI [ --user ]
.B stop bitcoind
on Linux,
.B launchctl kill SIGTERM
on macOS.
.TP
.BR monitor " [" --user " | " --system ]
Follow the daemon's log:
.B journalctl
.RI [ --user ]
.B -u bitcoind -f
on Linux,
.B tail -f
of the data dir's
.I bitcoind.log
on macOS.
.TP
.BR space " [" --user " | " --system ]
Print the data directory's disk usage
.RB ( du\ -sh ).
Errors when the data dir does not yet exist. The data dir is
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/bitcoin
for
.BR --user
and
.I /var/lib/bitcoin
for
.BR --system ,
matching
.BR enable .

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I share/bitcoin/units/bitcoind.service
.TQ
.I share/bitcoin/units/bitcoind.plist
systemd and launchd unit templates rendered by
.BR enable .
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/bitcoind.service
.TQ
.I /etc/systemd/system/bitcoind.service
Installed systemd unit (\c
.B --user
and
.B --system
respectively).
.TP
.I ~/Library/LaunchAgents/org.bitcoin.bitcoind.plist
.TQ
.I /Library/LaunchDaemons/org.bitcoin.bitcoind.plist
Installed launchd unit (\c
.B --user
and
.B --system
respectively).
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/bitcoin
.TQ
.I /var/lib/bitcoin
Per-mode data directory (\c
.B --user
and
.B --system
respectively) that
.B enable
points the unit at and that
.B space
reports on.
.TP
.IB $XDG_DATA_HOME /bitcoin/bitcoind.log
The log
.B monitor
tails on macOS (Linux reads the journal via
.BR journalctl ).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Equivalent to
.BR -d .
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Equivalent to
.BR -q .
.TP
.B BITCOIN_BITCOIND
Override the
.B bitcoind
binary path used by
.BR enable ,
bypassing the
.B command -v bitcoind
PATH lookup.
.TP
.B BITCOIN_CORE_REPO
Override the Bitcoin Core git URL cloned by
.B "install --from source"
(default
.IR https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin ).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-backend (1),
.BR bitcoind (1),
.BR bitcoin-cli (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).
.B install
added in 1.22.0 (FEAT-033);
.B enable
and
.B disable
added in 1.22.0 (FEAT-034). In 1.22.0 the legacy
.BR start ", " stop ", " monitor ", and " space
verbs were folded onto the same systemd / launchd service and
gained
.B --user
/
.B --system
modes and test coverage (BUG-015).
