.TH BITCOIN-ADDRESS 1 "2026-05-30" "bitcoin 1.33.0" "Bitcoin Tools"
.SH NAME
bitcoin\-address \- validate Bitcoin addresses, detect their type, and generate them from a public key
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin address validate
.I addr
.br
.B bitcoin address type
.I addr
.br
.B bitcoin address decode
.I addr
.br
.B bitcoin address generate
[\fB\-\-p2wpkh\fR|\fB\-\-p2pkh\fR|\fB\-\-p2tr\fR]
[\fB\-\-testnet\fR]
.I pubkey-hex
.br
.B bitcoin address help
.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin address
takes no top-level flags. Per-subcommand semantics are documented
under DESCRIPTION below. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin address
provides address validation and introspection across all five Bitcoin
address types: P2PKH, P2SH, P2WPKH, P2WSH, and P2TR.
.PP
Both mainnet and testnet addresses are accepted. For bech32 and bech32m
addresses the underlying BIP-173 and BIP-350 plugins are used; for
base58check addresses the BIP-13 base58 decoder is used.
.SS Subcommands
.TP
.BI "validate " addr
Exit 0 if
.I addr
is a well-formed Bitcoin address of a recognised type; exit 1 with an
error message otherwise. Prints the address on success.
.TP
.BI "type " addr
Print the address type on stdout:
.IP
.B p2pkh
\(em legacy Pay-to-PubKey-Hash (base58check, version byte 0x00 mainnet /
0x6f testnet)
.IP
.B p2sh
\(em Pay-to-Script-Hash (base58check, version byte 0x05 / 0xc4)
.IP
.B p2wpkh
\(em native segwit v0, 20-byte witness program (bech32 BIP-173)
.IP
.B p2wsh
\(em native segwit v0, 32-byte witness program (bech32 BIP-173)
.IP
.B p2tr
\(em Taproot / segwit v1, 32-byte witness program (bech32m BIP-350)
.TP
.BI "decode " addr
Print the underlying hash or witness program as lowercase hex. For
P2PKH and P2SH this is the 20-byte hash160; for segwit types it is the
witness program.
.TP
.BI "generate " "[--p2wpkh|--p2pkh|--p2tr] [--testnet] pubkey-hex"
Derive a Bitcoin address from a 33-byte compressed public key (66 hex
characters, with a
.B 02
or
.B 03
prefix byte).
.IP
The default address type is
.B P2WPKH
(native segwit v0, bech32, BIP-173). Use
.B \-\-p2pkh
for legacy base58check, or
.B \-\-p2tr
for Taproot (bech32m, BIP-350 / BIP-341).
.IP
.B \-\-testnet
selects the testnet HRP
.RB ( tb )
or version byte
.RB ( 0x6f ).
.IP
Exits 2 on usage error (missing or ambiguous argument); exits 1 if the
public key is not a valid 33-byte compressed point.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Address is invalid or of an unrecognised type.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (missing argument or unknown subcommand).
.SH FILES
.B bitcoin address
reads no files. The underlying bip173 and bip350 plugins read no
persistent state.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enable shell tracing (inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1)).
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppress info-level log output (inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1)).
.SH STANDARDS
.TP
BIP-13
\(em Base58Check address encoding.
.TP
BIP-141 / BIP-173
\(em Segregated Witness; bech32 P2WPKH / P2WSH addresses.
.TP
BIP-341 / BIP-350
\(em Taproot; bech32m P2TR addresses.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip13 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip173 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip350 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip341 (1)
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in bitcoin 1.32.0 (FEAT-046).
.B generate
subcommand added in bitcoin 1.33.0 (FEAT-047).
