.\" Manpage for bitcoin-wallet(1) — wallet lifecycle and operations.
.TH BITCOIN-WALLET 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-wallet \- create, derive, sign, send, and synchronise wallets

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin wallet new
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin wallet ls
.br
.B bitcoin wallet rm
.RI [ -f ]
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin wallet derive
.I name
.RI [ "--walk" "] [" "--gap N" ]
.br
.B bitcoin wallet addresses
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin wallet label
.RI [ "tx | utxo | addr" ]
.I name
.I key
.I text
.br
.B bitcoin wallet balance
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin wallet send
.I name
.I addr
.I sats
.RI [ "--fee-rate sat/vB" "] [" "--utxo txid:vout" "...] [" --mainnet ]
.br
.B bitcoin wallet index
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin wallet tx
.I name
.I txid
.br
.B bitcoin wallet history
.I name
.RI [ "--label pattern" ]
.br
.B bitcoin wallet remote add
.I name
.I remote
.I url
.br
.B bitcoin wallet push
.I name
.RI [ remote ]
.br
.B bitcoin wallet pull
.I name
.RI [ remote ]
.br
.B bitcoin wallet watch
.I name xpub
.br
.B bitcoin wallet xpub
.I name
.br
.B bitcoin wallet help

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin wallet
takes no top-level flags. Per-subcommand flags are documented
under SUBCOMMANDS below. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin wallet
is the wallet-lifecycle and wallet-operations verb. Each wallet
is a per-name git repository under
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/
holding the signing context: config, descriptors, derived-address
ledger, label store, and (after
.BR "wallet index" )
cached transactions. The seed phrase lives in
.BR secret (1),
not in the wallet repo, so the repo can be safely pushed to a
remote via
.B wallet push
without leaking key material (FEAT-011).

The default derivation path is
.B m/84h/0h/0h/0/i
(BIP-84 native segwit). Address generation, signing, and balance
queries all go through that path; the active backend (see
.BR bitcoin-backend (1))
provides chain data.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "new " name
Create a new wallet at
.IB ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/ name /.
Generates a BIP-39 mnemonic and stores it via
.B secret put
.IB name /seed.
.TP
.B ls
List existing wallets (one per line).
.TP
.BR "rm " [ -f ]
.I name
Remove a wallet. With
.BR -f ,
also removes
.BR "secret " name /seed.
.TP
.BI "derive " name " [--walk] [--gap N]"
Derive the next BIP-84 receive address; append it to the wallet's
address ledger and commit.
.IP
With
.BR --walk
(FEAT-044), perform a BIP-44 gap-limit scan instead: derive
forward from the ledger top, probe each address's on-chain
history via
.B "bitcoin backend get-address-txs"
.RB ( bitcoin-backend (1)),
append every address that has history, and stop after
.I N
consecutive empty addresses
.RB ( "--gap" ,
default 20). This discovers addresses funded out-of-band (e.g.
generated by another wallet) that the local ledger never knew
about. All discovered rows commit in one commit; the walk is a
no-op (no commit) if nothing new is found.
.B --gap 0
disables the walk (equivalent to a plain
.BR derive ).
The walk probes sequentially \(em the mempool.space backend
rate-limits to roughly one request per second.
.TP
.BI "addresses " name
List every derived address with its index and label.
.TP
.BR "label " { "tx | utxo | addr" }
.I name
.I key
.I text
Set or clear a label.
.B tx
labels by
.IR txid ;
.B utxo
labels by
.IR txid:vout ;
.B addr
labels by address. Empty
.I text
clears the entry. The compat form
.BI "label " "name addr text"
(no kind prefix) is treated as
.BR "label addr ..."
for pre-1.19.0 callers.
.TP
.BI "label " name " " outpoint " --tax " category " [--note " text ]
FEAT-038 (1.23.0) tax-vocabulary form. Persist a tax category
on the outpoint (txid, txid:vout, or address \(em kind inferred
from shape). The category must be one of:
.BR self-transfer ,
.BR income ,
.BR gift-in ,
.BR gift-out ,
.BR purchase ,
.BR sale ,
.BR spend ,
.BR fee ,
.BR lending-out ,
.BR lending-in ,
.BR loss-claim ,
.BR channel-open ,
.BR channel-close .
See
.BR bitcoin-tax (1)
for the workflow shorthand
.BR "bitcoin tax label --as " category .
.TP
.BI "label " name " " outpoint " --free-text " text
FEAT-038 free-text escape hatch. Stores
.I text
without a tax category; preserves the pre-1.23.0 2-column TSV
shape so existing readers continue to work.
.TP
.BR "label " name " --show " [ outpoint ]
Print every label in the wallet (or just the row for
.IR outpoint ).
Output columns:
.BR kind ", " key ", " tax_category ", " text .
Empty fields render as
.IR - .
.TP
.BR "label " name " --validate"
Walk every row in
.B labels/tx
and
.BR labels/utxo ;
print any rows that lack a tax category and exit non-zero if
any are found. Useful as a release-time gate before running
.BR "bitcoin tax report-de"
(1.25.0).
.TP
.BI "balance " name
Sum UTXO values for all derived addresses via the active backend.
.TP
.BR "build " / " sign " / " broadcast"
Removed in 1.24.0. These transaction operations moved to the
.B tx
object verb \(em see
.BR bitcoin-tx (1):
.BR "bitcoin tx build" ,
.BR "bitcoin tx sign" ,
.BR "bitcoin tx broadcast" .
Calling them under
.B wallet
errors with a pointer to the canonical form. The
.B send
verb below remains the one-shot convenience composition.
.TP
.BI "send " "name addr sats" " [--fee-rate sat/vB] [--utxo txid:vout ...] [--mainnet]"
End-to-end: build | sign | psbt finalize | psbt extract |
broadcast. Prints the txid the backend returned.
.BR --mainnet
is required when the wallet's config says
.B network=mainnet ;
ignored on other networks.
.B --utxo
(FEAT-042, 1.23.0+) is repeatable coin control — same shape as
.BR "bitcoin tx build --utxo" :
each
.I txid:vout
restricts selection to that outpoint. Pair with
.BR bitcoin-utxo (1)
.B select
to preview a branch-and-bound subset, then feed the chosen
outpoints back into
.BR "wallet send" .
.TP
.BI "index " name
For every address in the wallet's ledger, fetch every tx via
.B "bitcoin backend get-address-txs"
and cache the raw hex + decoded JSON under
.IB <wallet>/transactions/ <txid> "" .{ hex,json }.
Updates the history ledger and commits. Idempotent.
.TP
.BI "tx " "name txid"
Print the cached
.IB transactions/ txid .hex
(and
.BR .json )
without re-querying the backend.
.TP
.BI "history " name " [--label pattern]"
List the wallet's history ledger:
.BR txid ", " height ", " direction ", " "net sats" .
With
.BR --label ,
filter rows whose tx-label matches
.I pattern
(case-insensitive substring).
.TP
.BI "remote add " "name remote url"
Set or replace a git remote on the wallet repo.
.TP
.BI "push " name
.RI [ remote ]
.B git push
the wallet (default remote:
.BR origin ).
.TP
.BI "pull " name
.RI [ remote ]
.B git pull --rebase
the wallet (default remote:
.BR origin ).
.TP
.BI "watch " name " " xpub
Create a watch-only wallet from an account-level extended public key
(xpub, at
.BR m/84h/0h/0h ).
Derives receive addresses without requiring the seed phrase. Signing
operations (
.B tx sign
,
.BR wallet send )
are not possible on watch-only wallets and will exit with a clear
error (FEAT-045).
.TP
.BI "xpub " name
Print the account-level xpub
.RB ( m/84h/0h/0h )
for a regular wallet, suitable for sharing with watch-only setups or
cosigners (FEAT-045).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/
The wallet's git repository.
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/config
Per-wallet config (network, derivation path overrides).
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/addresses
Append-only ledger of derived addresses with their indexes.
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/labels/{tx,utxo}
TSV label stores keyed by txid and outpoint.
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/transactions/<txid>.{hex,json}
Cached raw and decoded transactions populated by
.BR "wallet index" .
.TP
.I ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/history
History ledger:
.BR txid ", " height ", " direction ", " "net sats" .

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
If set, wallets root at
.IB $XDG_DATA_HOME /bitcoin/wallets/
instead of
.IR ~/.local/var/bitcoin/wallets/ .
.TP
.B BITCOIN_BACKEND
See
.BR bitcoin-backend (1).
Overrides the active backend used for balance / index / broadcast.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-backend (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip39 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1),
.BR bitcoin-psbt (1),
.BR secret (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0; functionality has grown through
FEAT-010 (wallet store as git), FEAT-011 (push/pull), FEAT-013
(derive/addresses), FEAT-018 (index/history), FEAT-019 (labels),
and FEAT-026 (send). Man page added in 1.23.0 (FEAT-041).

In a future release the
.BR build ", " sign ", " broadcast ", " index
verbs will rename to the
.B bitcoin tx
and
.B bitcoin utxo
object surfaces (FEAT-036, FEAT-037, target 1.23.0+);
.B wallet send
will remain the high-level convenience verb.
