.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip13(1) — BIP-13 base58 / base58check.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP13 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip13 \- BIP-13 address format primitives (base58 / base58check)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip13
.RI [ options ]
.B base58-encode
.RI [ file ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip13
.RI [ options ]
.B base58-decode
.RI [ file ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip13 help
.RI [ command ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip13
implements the encoding primitives BIP-13 builds on: plain base58
(no checksum) for arbitrary binary input and base58 decoding back
to binary. The hashed-script address format documented in BIP-13
is composed by callers (e.g.
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)
and
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1))
out of these primitives.

Per the no-shared-library policy (CLAUDE.md §4), this plugin is
self-contained: it depends only on standard Unix utilities
.RB ( dc ", " basenc ", " openssl )
and never reaches for another
.B bipXXX
plugin or for wallet state.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d
Enable debug output (sets shell trace).
.TP
.B -q
Quiet mode (suppress info logging).
.TP
.B -p
Read BIP-39 passphrase from the controlling terminal.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BR "base58-encode " [ file ]
Encode the binary
.I file
(or stdin if omitted) as a base58 string. No checksum is appended;
callers that want base58check should append the 4-byte SHA256d
checksum themselves before encoding.
.TP
.BR "base58-decode " [ file ]
Decode the base58 string in
.I file
(or stdin) back to raw bytes on stdout.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error (unrecognised subcommand, missing argument).
.TP
.B 2
Input contained a character outside the base58 alphabet.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
If non-empty, enables shell trace
.RB ( "set -vx" )
on every line. Equivalent to passing
.BR -d .
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
If non-empty, suppresses info-level logging. Equivalent to
.BR -q .

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-13 (Address Format for pay-to-script-hash), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0013.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip39 (1),
.BR bitcoin-wif (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).
