.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip173(1) — BIP-173 bech32 encoding.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP173 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.23.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip173 \- bech32 string encoding (BIP-173)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip173
.B encode
.I hrp
.I data
.br
.B bitcoin bip173
.B decode
.I string
.br
.B bitcoin bip173
.B verify
.I string
.br
.B bitcoin bip173 help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip173
implements the bech32 string format from BIP-173 end-to-end:
encode a checksummed bech32 string from a human-readable part
(HRP) and a data part of bech32-charset chars; decode such a
string back into HRP and 5-bit data values; verify the
6-character checksum without producing the data.

Bech32 is not by itself a binary-to-text encoding \(em it
requires additional padding conventions (e.g. the segwit
"witness version + program" framing) to map raw bytes to and
from a checksummed string. Callers that want segwit addresses
should layer those conventions on top of this plugin.

For the bech32m variant introduced by BIP-350, see
.BR bitcoin-bip350 (1).
The two plugins share the polymod generator values but differ
in the final XOR constant
.RB ( 1
for bech32,
.B 0x2bc830a3
for bech32m).

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin bip173
takes no top-level flags. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "encode " "hrp data"
Emit a bech32 string from an explicit HRP (1\-83 chars,
printable ASCII, all-lowercase or all-uppercase) and a
.I data
part of characters drawn from the bech32 charset
.RB ( qpzry9x8gf2tvdw0s3jn54khce6mua7l ).
The 6-character checksum is computed and appended.
.TP
.BI "decode " string
Decode a bech32 string. Validates the checksum, prints the HRP
on the first line and each 5-bit data value (as a decimal
integer 0\-31) on subsequent lines.
.TP
.BI "verify " string
Verify the checksum of
.I string
without producing data. Exits 0 on success.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Missing required argument.
.TP
.B 3
.B encode :
mixed-case input (BIP-173 §Checksum verification rejects this).
.B verify :
input is not a well-formed bech32 (HRP, '1', data).
.B decode :
char outside printable ASCII (33\-126).
.TP
.B 4
.B encode :
combined HRP + data + 6-char checksum exceeds 90 chars.
.B decode :
mixed-case input.
.TP
.B 5
.B encode :
HRP length out of range (must be 1\-83).
.B verify :
re-encode produced a different checksum (mismatch).
.TP
.B 6
.B encode :
HRP char outside printable ASCII (33\-126).
.B decode :
no '1' separator.
.TP
.B 7
.B encode :
data part contains a char outside the bech32 charset.
.B decode :
empty HRP.
.TP
.B 8
.B decode :
data part too short (need \(>= 6 chars for the checksum).
.TP
.B 9
.B decode :
checksum mismatch.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enables shell trace
.RB ( "set -vx" ).
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppresses info-level logging.

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-173 (Base32 address format for native v0\-16 witness
outputs), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0173.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip350 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bech32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 (FEAT-035 Stream C). The
deprecated
.B bitcoin bech32
verb covers the same encoding via a different CLI shape and
will alias here in a subsequent release.
