.\" Manpage for bitcoin-wif(1) — Wallet Import Format.
.TH BITCOIN-WIF 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-wif \- Wallet Import Format (WIF) encode and decode

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin wif
.RI [ options ]
.B encode
.RI [ -t "] [" -p ]
.br
.B bitcoin wif
.RI [ options ]
.B decode
.br
.B bitcoin wif help
.RI [ command ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin wif
implements the Wallet Import Format encoding used to ship private
keys in a human-typeable, checksummed string.

The encoder reads a 32-byte private key (hex on stdin) and emits
the WIF string. With
.BR -p
the input is treated as a public key (no version-byte prepended;
the standard "public-key WIF" form). With
.BR -t
the test-net version byte is used.

The decoder reads a WIF string from stdin and emits the raw
32-byte private key (hex) on stdout, verifying the embedded
checksum.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d
Enable debug output (shell trace).
.TP
.B -q
Quiet mode (suppress info logging).

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B "encode " [ -t "] [" -p ]
Encode the input key as a WIF string.
.RB ( -t
= testnet,
.B -p
= treat input as a public key.)
.TP
.B decode
Decode a WIF string and emit the raw key. Exits non-zero on a
checksum mismatch.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error or checksum failure. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Equivalent to
.BR -d .
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Equivalent to
.BR -q .

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
Wallet Import Format \(em the de-facto base58check encoding
documented in the Bitcoin wiki
.RB ( https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Wallet_import_format ).
WIF is not a numbered BIP, but is reproduced for reference at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/wif.md .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip13 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).
