.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bech32(1) — BIP-173 / BIP-350 bech32(m).
.TH BITCOIN-BECH32 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bech32 \- bech32 and bech32m encoding (BIP-173, BIP-350)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bech32
.RI [ -m ]
.I hrp
.I data
.br
.B bitcoin bech32-encode
.RI [ -m ]
.I hrp
.br
.B bitcoin bech32-decode
.RI [ -m ]
.I string
.br
.B bitcoin bech32-verify
.RI [ -m ]
.I string

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bech32
implements the bech32 string format (BIP-173) and its bech32m
variant (BIP-350). The base verb emits a bech32 (or, with
.BR -m ,
bech32m) string from a human-readable part and a non-checked data
part of pre-encoded 5-bit symbols; the
.BR -encode "/" -decode "/" -verify
sibling verbs operate on binary input and address-shaped data
respectively.

Bech32 is not by itself a binary-to-text encoding; it requires
additional padding conventions (e.g. the segwit "witness version
+ program" framing) to map raw bytes to and from a checksummed
string. Callers that want segwit addresses should layer on top of
this plugin.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -m
Use the bech32m constant
.RB ( 0x2bc830a3 )
instead of the bech32 constant
.RB ( 1 ).
Required for segwit v1+ (Taproot) addresses per BIP-350.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BR "bech32 " [ -m ]
.I "hrp data"
Emit a bech32(m) string from an explicit human-readable part
.RI ( hrp ,
1\-83 chars, all-lowercase or all-uppercase) and a data part of
characters drawn from the bech32 charset
.RB ( "qpzry9x8gf2tvdw0s3jn54khce6mua7l" ).
The 6-character checksum is computed and appended.
.TP
.BR "bech32-encode " [ -m ]
.I "hrp"
Encode raw binary data on stdin (after 8-to-5-bit regrouping with
the conventions documented in BIP-173 §Encoding) under
.I hrp .
.TP
.BR "bech32-decode " [ -m ]
.I "string"
Decode a bech32(m)
.I string ;
print the human-readable part and the decoded raw data part on
stdout.
.TP
.BR "bech32-verify " [ -m ]
.I "string"
Verify the checksum of
.I string
without producing data; exit 0 on success.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (or, for
.BR bech32-verify ,
checksum is valid).
.TP
.B 1
Mixed-case input (per BIP-173 §Checksum verification, all-upper
and all-lower are valid but mixing is rejected).
.TP
.B 2
Combined length of HRP + data + 6-char checksum exceeds 90.
.TP
.B 3
HRP length out of range (must be 1\-83).
.TP
.B 4
HRP contained a character outside the printable ASCII range
33\-126.
.TP
.B 5
Data part contained a character outside the bech32 charset.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
None specific.

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-173 (Base32 address format for native v0\-16 witness outputs),
shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0173.mediawiki .
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-350 (Bech32m format for v1+ witness addresses), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0350.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip13 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).

In a future release the verb family will split: bech32 (BIP-173)
moves to
.B bitcoin bip173
and bech32m (BIP-350) to
.B bitcoin bip350
(FEAT-035, target 1.23.0+); the existing names remain as
deprecated aliases for one release after the split.
