.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip39(1) — BIP-39 mnemonics.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP39 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip39 \- BIP-39 mnemonic generation and validation

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip39
.RI [ options ]
.B words
.RI [ wordlist ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip39
.RI [ options ]
.B create
.RI [ "bits | ent" ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip39
.RI [ options ]
.B check
.I mnemonic
.br
.B bitcoin bip39
.RI [ options ]
.B seed
.I mnemonic
.br
.B bitcoin bip39 help
.RI [ command ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip39
implements the BIP-39 mnemonic specification: convert entropy to a
human-readable word sequence (and back), check that a mnemonic
has the right length and checksum, and derive the binary seed used
as input to
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d
Enable debug output (shell trace).
.TP
.B -q
Quiet mode (suppress info logging).
.TP
.B -p
Read a BIP-39 passphrase from the controlling terminal at seed time.
The passphrase is concatenated with the literal salt
.B "mnemonic"
per BIP-39 §From mnemonic to seed.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BR "words " [ wordlist ]
Print the words of
.I wordlist
(default: English) one per line. The English list is the only one
shipped today.
.TP
.BR "create " [ "bits | ent" ]
Generate a mnemonic. Pass a bit length (one of 128, 160, 192, 224,
256) to specify entropy; pass a hex string to use that entropy
verbatim (deterministic — for tests and vectors).
.TP
.BI "check " mnemonic
Validate a mnemonic's word count (must be one of 12, 15, 18, 21,
24) and its embedded checksum. Exits 0 if valid.
.TP
.BI "seed " mnemonic
Apply PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512 (salt =
.BR "mnemonic" + passphrase ,
2048 iterations, 64-byte output) to the mnemonic; output is hex.
Validates the BIP-39 §3 checksum before deriving.
.TP
.BR "mnemonic-to-seed " [ word " ...]"
Binary form of
.BR seed
(suitable for piping into
.BR "bitcoin bip32 create" ).
Reads words from positional args or from the first stdin line if
no args are given. Permissive on checksum (validates word count
only) so that out-of-spec test vectors pass through. Subsumes the
deprecated standalone
.B bitcoin mnemonic-to-seed
verb (FEAT-035, 1.23.0).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I share/bitcoin/words/english.txt
The English BIP-39 word list shipped with the package.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BIP39_PASSPHRASE
Non-interactive form of
.BR -p .
Used as the optional passphrase appended to the literal
.B "mnemonic"
salt during seed derivation.
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Equivalent to
.BR -d .
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Equivalent to
.BR -q .

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-39 (Mnemonic code for generating deterministic keys), shipped
at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0039.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-mnemonic-to-seed (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041). The
.B mnemonic-to-seed
subcommand was folded in from the standalone
.B libexec/bitcoin/mnemonic-to-seed
plugin in 1.23.0 (FEAT-035); the standalone verb remains as a
deprecated alias that emits a warn line and forwards here until
1.24.0.
