.\" Manpage for bitcoin-price(1) — BTC/EUR price oracle (FEAT-040).
.TH BITCOIN-PRICE 1 "2026-05-23" "bitcoin 1.25.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-price \- BTC/EUR historical price oracle (local cache)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin price get
.I YYYY-MM-DD
.br
.B bitcoin price fetch
.RI [ "--from YYYY-MM-DD" "] [" "--to YYYY-MM-DD" ]
.br
.B bitcoin price source
.RI [ "--set coingecko|kraken|csv://<path>" ]
.br
.B bitcoin price status
.br
.B bitcoin price help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin price
maintains a deterministic, offline-after-warm cache of daily
BTC/EUR prices for the German tax report
.RB ( "bitcoin tax report-de" ,
FEAT-039, 1.25.0).

.B fetch
is the only verb that touches the network;
.BR get ", " status
read the cache only. This keeps a report run reproducible and
auditable: the cache is the canonical input, populated by an
explicit
.B fetch
step the user runs beforehand. Given the same wallet history
and the same cache, the report is byte-identical every run.

The
.B "price of the day"
is the
.B "00:00 UTC snapshot"
the source reports for the requested date. CoinGecko's
historical endpoint returns that snapshot directly; kraken and
csv rows snap to the same 00:00 UTC daily mark.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "--from " YYYY-MM-DD
First date to fetch (inclusive). Defaults to today.
.TP
.BI "--to " YYYY-MM-DD
Last date to fetch (inclusive). Defaults to
.BR --from .
.TP
.BI "--set " "coingecko|kraken|csv://<path>"
On
.BR source ,
set the active price source.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "get " YYYY-MM-DD
Print EUR per BTC for the date, read from the local cache.
Errors (with a
.B warn
pointing at
.BR fetch )
if the date isn't cached \(em there are no silent network
fetches here, so reports stay reproducible.
.TP
.BR "fetch " [ "--from D" "] [" "--to D" ]
Populate the cache from the active source for the date range
(default: today). Idempotent \(em only missing dates are
fetched. The
.B only
networked verb.
.TP
.BR "source " [ "--set <source>" ]
View or set the price source. Default
.BR coingecko .
.B csv://<path>
reads a local CSV (columns: date, eur_per_btc, ignored) with no
network call;
.B kraken
is scaffolded but not implemented in this release.
.TP
.B status
Print the cache location, row count, date coverage, and active
source.
.TP
.B help
This message.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Missing / unexpected argument, or unknown subcommand / flag.
.TP
.B 3
Invalid date, or
.B --from
after
.BR --to .
.TP
.B \(>=4
Cache empty / date not cached
.RB ( get ),
or fetch-source error
.RB ( fetch ).
Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.bitcoin/cache/price/btc-eur.tsv
The price cache. Three TAB-separated columns:
.BR date " (ISO 8601, UTC, the 00:00 UTC snapshot), " eur_per_btc ", " source .
Append-only; the most recent row per date wins (later revisions
are appended with a fresh source tag). Global per machine \(em
shared across wallets, not in any wallet's git repo.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/bitcoin/price-source
Persists the active source name.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BITCOIN_PRICE_CACHE
Override the cache path (default
.IR ~/.bitcoin/cache/price/btc-eur.tsv ).
.TP
.B BITCOIN_PRICE_SOURCE
Override the active source (highest priority, above the config
file).
.TP
.B BITCOIN_COINGECKO_URL
Override the CoinGecko API base (default
.IR https://api.coingecko.com ).

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
CoinGecko historical price API:
.UR https://docs.coingecko.com/reference/coins-id-history
.UE
\(em
.IR /api/v3/coins/bitcoin/history?date=DD-MM-YYYY .
.IP \(bu 2
Kraken OHLC API (scaffolded):
.UR https://docs.kraken.com/api/docs/rest-api/get-ohlc-data
.UE .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-tax (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.25.0 (FEAT-040) as the
deterministic price input for the German tax report
.RB ( "bitcoin tax report-de" ,
FEAT-039). BTC/EUR only \(em other fiat pairs land with their
own
.B tax report-XX
verbs.
