.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip340(1) — Schnorr signatures (BIP-340).
.TH BITCOIN-BIP340 1 "2026-05-28" "bitcoin 1.26.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip340 \- Schnorr signatures over secp256k1 (BIP-340)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip340 pubkey
.I sk-hex
.br
.B bitcoin bip340 sign
.I sk-hex
.I msg-hex
.RI [ aux-hex ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip340 verify
.I px-hex
.I msg-hex
.I sig-hex
.br
.B bitcoin bip340 tagged-hash
.I tag
.I msg-hex
.br
.B bitcoin bip340 help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip340
implements BIP-340 Schnorr signatures over secp256k1: deterministic
nonces (with optional auxiliary randomness), x-only public keys,
64-byte signatures, and the
.BR tagged_hash
helper that BIP-340, BIP-341 and BIP-342 all depend on.

The plugin is self-contained: it carries its own affine secp256k1
arithmetic (modinv via Fermat's little theorem using
.BR dc 's
.B |
operator) rather than sharing code with
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1).
Per the repo's no-shared-library convention (CLAUDE.md \(sc 4 / \(sc 5)
each BIP plugin owns its primitives so each is BIP-faithful in
isolation.

.SH OPTIONS
This plugin takes no top-level options. Each subcommand consumes its
arguments positionally; see
.B SUBCOMMANDS
below.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "pubkey " "sk-hex"
Print the 32-byte x-only public key for the given 32-byte secret key.
.TP
.BI "sign " "sk-hex msg-hex " [ aux-hex ]
Produce a 64-byte Schnorr signature over
.I msg-hex
with secret key
.IR sk-hex .
The optional
.I aux-hex
defaults to 32 zero bytes; the algorithm is deterministic given the
same inputs.
.TP
.BI "verify " "px-hex msg-hex sig-hex"
Verify a signature. Prints
.B TRUE
on success and exits 0; prints
.B FALSE
and exits 1 on any failure (out-of-range field elements, pubkey not
on the curve, R = infinity, x mismatch, odd y on R).
.TP
.BI "tagged-hash " "tag msg-hex"
Print
.BR "sha256(sha256(tag) || sha256(tag) || msg)" ,
the BIP-340 tagged hash primitive. Used by callers (e.g.
.BR bitcoin-bip341 (1))
for the
.BR TapTweak ,
.BR BIP0340/challenge
and
.BR BIP0340/nonce
tags.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Verify returned FALSE.
.TP
.B 2
Missing argument or unknown subcommand.

.SH PERFORMANCE
The affine engine inverts a 256-bit field element at every step,
which is correct but slow (each scalar mult \(ap 10 s, sign \(ap 22 s,
verify \(ap 22 s). A Jacobian-coordinate fast-path that does one
inversion per scalar mult is a tracked follow-up.

.SH FILES
.TP
.IB share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0340.mediawiki
Local copy of BIP-340 (pinned commit recorded in
.IB UPSTREAM.txt
alongside).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
If set, emit
.B debug -
trace lines to stderr.
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
If set, suppress informational
.B info -
lines.
.TP
.B SELF_LIBEXEC
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1);
the parent dispatcher resolves this plugin via
.IB $SELF_LIBEXEC /bitcoin/bip340 .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip341 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1)

.SH STANDARDS
BIP-340 \(em Schnorr Signatures for secp256k1:
<https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki>.

.SH HISTORY
Introduced in bitcoin 1.26.0 (FEAT-007). Affine engine; Jacobian
fast-path follows.
