.\" Manpage for bitcoin-bip32(1) — BIP-32 HD wallets.
.TH BITCOIN-BIP32 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-bip32 \- hierarchical deterministic key derivation (BIP-32)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin bip32
.RI [ options ]
.B create
.RI [ -st ]
.RI [ "passphrase" ]
.br
.B bitcoin bip32
.RI [ options ]
.B derive
.I path
.br
.B bitcoin bip32
.RI [ options ]
.B ser32
.I i
.br
.B bitcoin bip32
.RI [ options ]
.B ser256
.I p
.br
.B bitcoin bip32
.RI [ options ]
.B hash160
.br
.B bitcoin bip32 is-secret
.I key
.br
.B bitcoin bip32 is-public
.I key
.br
.B bitcoin bip32 help
.RI [ command ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin bip32
implements the hierarchical-deterministic key tree from BIP-32.

With no derivation argument, the plugin reads a binary seed from
stdin and emits the corresponding master extended key. When stdout
is a terminal, the output is base58check-encoded
.RB ( xprv "/" xpub );
otherwise the raw 78-byte serialised form is written.

With a derivation path, the plugin reads a serialised extended key
from stdin and emits the derived key. Hardened steps are written
as
.IR i'
or
.IR iH ;
unhardened steps as
.IR i .
A leading
.B m
expects a master private key; leading
.B M
expects a master public key; a leading
.B /
applies the derivation to whatever key is on stdin.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d
Enable debug output (shell trace).
.TP
.B -q
Quiet mode (suppress info logging).
.TP
.B -t
Generate keys for the test network (4-byte version prefix swap).
.TP
.B -s
On
.BR create ,
interpret stdin as a seed in hex format rather than raw bytes.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B "create " [ "-st" "] [" "passphrase" ]
Generate a master extended key from a binary (or hex with
.BR -s )
seed on stdin.
.TP
.BI "derive " path
Derive the child key at
.I path
from the serialised extended key on stdin.
.TP
.BI "ser32 " i
Serialise the 32-bit unsigned integer
.I i
as a 4-byte big-endian sequence (BIP-32 §Serialisation helper).
.TP
.BI "ser256 " p
Serialise
.I p
as a 32-byte big-endian sequence (BIP-32 §Serialisation helper).
.TP
.B hash160
Compute
.B RIPEMD160(SHA256(input))
for the bytes on stdin.
.TP
.BI "is-secret " key
Exit 0 if
.I key
is an extended private key
.RB ( xprv "/" tprv );
non-zero otherwise.
.TP
.BI "is-public " key
Exit 0 if
.I key
is an extended public key
.RB ( xpub "/" tpub );
non-zero otherwise.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
General error. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10.

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Equivalent to
.BR -d .
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Equivalent to
.BR -q .

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-32 (Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets), shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0032.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip13 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip39 (1),
.BR bitcoin-descriptor (1),
.BR bitcoin-mnemonic-to-seed (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).
