.\" Manpage for bitcoin-tx(1) — transaction object verb (FEAT-036).
.TH BITCOIN-TX 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.23.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-tx \- transaction as a first-class object verb

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin tx build
.I wallet
.I address
.I sats
.RI [ "--fee-rate sat/vB" "] [" "--utxo txid:vout" "...]"
.br
.B bitcoin tx sign
.I wallet
.br
.B bitcoin tx decode
.br
.B bitcoin tx finalize
.br
.B bitcoin tx extract
.br
.B bitcoin tx broadcast
.I wallet
.br
.B bitcoin tx help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin tx
exposes transactions as a noun: build / sign / decode / finalize
/ extract / broadcast. The full one-shot pipeline (build through
broadcast) lives in
.BR "bitcoin wallet send" ;
the
.B tx
verbs let you compose the steps independently \(em
build-now-sign-later, sign-without-broadcasting,
decode-an-unknown-hex, broadcast-a-PSBT-someone-else-signed.

In 1.23.0
.B tx build
/
.B sign
/
.B broadcast
delegate to the historical
.B wallet build
/
.B sign
/
.B broadcast
implementations; rename + deprecation of the
.B wallet:*
names happens in a follow-up PR. The
.B decode
/
.B finalize
/
.B extract
verbs pass through to
.BR bitcoin-bip174 (1)
(FEAT-035 Stream D).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR "--fee-rate " sat/vB
Override the active backend's
.B estimate-fee 3
recommendation. Used by
.B tx build
when building the unsigned PSBT. Falls back to 1 sat/vB if the
backend estimate is unavailable.
.TP
.BR "--utxo " txid:vout
Coin control: restrict
.B tx build
to use only the specified outpoint(s). Repeatable; pass the
flag once per UTXO to include. When at least one
.B --utxo
is supplied, greedy selection is bypassed entirely \(em
only the listed outpoints are eligible. Each outpoint must
be unspent at one of the wallet's derived addresses; an
unknown outpoint errors with status 7. Pair with
.BR bitcoin-utxo (1)
.B ls
to enumerate available outpoints.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "build " "wallet address sats" " [--fee-rate sat/vB] [--utxo txid:vout ...]"
Greedy largest-first UTXO selection from the wallet's derived
addresses (default); builds an unsigned BIP-174 PSBT paying
.I sats
to
.I address ;
prints the PSBT as hex on stdout. P2WPKH / P2WSH outputs only
in this release.

With one or more
.B --utxo
flags, greedy selection is bypassed and only the listed
outpoints are used (FEAT-037 coin-control integration).
Frozen UTXOs (see
.BR bitcoin-utxo (1)
.BR freeze )
are skipped in both modes; in greedy mode each skip emits one
.B warn
line.
.TP
.BI "sign " wallet
Read a PSBT (hex) from stdin, derive a private key for every
address in
.IR wallet 's
ledger, pipe the PSBT through
.B bip174 sign
(FEAT-035 Stream D) once per key, and re-emit the PSBT on
stdout. Inputs the keys can't sign pass through unmodified.
.TP
.B decode
Read a PSBT (hex) from stdin and emit one TSV line per
key-value record
.RB ( "section=<n> type=<hex> key=<hex> value=<hex>" ).
Pure pass-through to
.BR "bitcoin bip174 decode" .
.TP
.B finalize
Promote each input's first
.B PSBT_IN_PARTIAL_SIG
to a finalised witness via
.B PSBT_IN_FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS
per BIP-174 §Finalizer. Pure pass-through to
.BR "bitcoin bip174 finalize" .
.TP
.B extract
Read a finalised PSBT from stdin and emit the broadcastable
BIP-141 / BIP-144 segwit raw tx as hex. Pass-through to
.BR "bitcoin bip174 extract" .
Refuses if any input lacks
.BR FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS .
.TP
.BI "broadcast " wallet
Read raw-tx hex from stdin; POST to the active backend (see
.BR bitcoin-backend (1)); print the broadcast txid.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
Missing required argument, or unknown subcommand.
.TP
.B \(>=1
Other errors propagate from the delegation target unchanged.
Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10, naming the failing component.

.SH FILES
.TP
.IB <wallet-repo>/addresses
The address ledger
.B build
and
.B sign
walk for coin selection and key derivation.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_LIBEXEC
Required when
.B decode
/
.B finalize
/
.B extract
exec into
.BR bitcoin-bip174 (1).
Inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1)
when invoked via the dispatcher.
.TP
.B BITCOIN_BACKEND
Forwarded to
.BR bitcoin-backend (1)
during
.B build
fee-estimation and
.B broadcast .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip174 (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1),
.BR bitcoin-backend (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.23.0 (FEAT-036). This release
ships the additive
.B tx
namespace; the
.B wallet build
/
.B sign
/
.B broadcast
deprecation aliases and the
.B --utxo
coin-control flag follow in a separate PR. The full
.B bitcoin wallet send
verb continues to work as the one-shot composition.
