.\" Manpage for bitcoin(1).
.TH BITCOIN 1 "2026-05-15" "1.15.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin \- educational Bitcoin frontend (BIPs implemented end-to-end)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin
is an educational Bitcoin frontend. It is built around four
design principles:

.IP \(bu 2
.B educational
\(em every subcommand cites the BIP it implements, and the
referenced spec is shipped locally under
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/ .
.IP \(bu 2
.B functional
\(em the tool is a real wallet: derive addresses, build and
sign transactions, broadcast through one of three backends.
.IP \(bu 2
.B decentralized
\(em the wallet repository is a git repository the user owns;
seed material lives outside of
.B bitcoin
in
.BR secret (1)
so wallets can be pushed and pulled between machines without
leaking key material.
.IP \(bu 2
.B simple
\(em the tool is bash + standard Unix utilities. There is no
shared cryptography library; each BIP plugin reaches for the
primitives it needs (openssl, dc, basenc) and is otherwise
self-contained.

.PP
A wallet is a per-name git repository at
.IR $XDG_DATA_HOME/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/
that holds the signing context (config, descriptors, the
addresses ledger). The seed phrase itself lives in
.BR secret (1)
\(em
.B bitcoin
calls
.B "secret get <wallet>/seed"
on demand whenever it needs to derive a key.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Enable debug output (
.IR set\ \-vx ).
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode \(em suppress info-level messages.
.TP
.B \-p
Prompt for a BIP-39 passphrase before any seed operation.
.TP
.B \-t
Test-mode placeholder.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.SS Generic
.TP
.B help \fR[\fIcommand\fR]
Print top-level help, or per-command help when
.I command
is given.
.TP
.B version
Print the package version
(from
.I VERSION
in the dev tree or
.IR $PREFIX/share/bitcoin/version
once installed).
.TP
.B modules
List the BIP plugins under
.IR libexec/bitcoin/ .

.SS BIP plugins (libexec/bitcoin/<name>)
.TP
.B bip13
Base58Check encoding and Pay-to-Script-Hash address support.
.TP
.B bip32
Hierarchical deterministic wallet derivation.
.TP
.B bip39
Mnemonic seed phrase encoding.
.TP
.B mnemonic-to-seed
BIP-39 PBKDF2 \(em turn a mnemonic into a 64-byte seed.
.TP
.B wif
Wallet Import Format private-key encoding.
.TP
.B daemon
Legacy daemon dispatcher (see
.B backend
for the supported abstraction).

.SS bech32 / bech32m (BIP-173, BIP-350)
.TP
.B bech32 \fR[\fB-m\fR] \fIhrp\fR \fIdata\fR
Encode a bech32 (or bech32m, with
.BR -m )
string from its human-readable part and data.
.TP
.B bech32-verify \fR[\fB-m\fR] \fIstring\fR
Verify a bech32/bech32m checksum.
.TP
.B bech32-encode \fR[\fB-m\fR] \fIhrp\fR \fIdata\fR
Lower-level encoder used by the address paths.
.TP
.B bech32-decode \fIstring\fR
Decode a bech32 string into its hrp and 5-bit data words.

.SS Output descriptors (BIP-380)
.TP
.B descriptor checksum \fIdescriptor\fR
Append the 8-character BIP-380 polymod checksum to a
descriptor body. Idempotent: passing in an already-checksummed
descriptor replaces the checksum.
.TP
.B descriptor verify \fIdescriptor#checksum\fR
Verify a descriptor's checksum.

.SS Backend (FEAT-012)
.TP
.B backend \fR[\fIaction\fR]
Print the active backend (
.IR view ,
the default) or set it.
.TP
.B backend set \fIname\fR
Switch the active backend (
.BR mempool ,
.BR bitcoind ,
.BR blockstream ).
Mempool is the only fully implemented backend in this release;
the others are stubs that return a clear "not implemented".
.TP
.B backend auto
Pick
.B bitcoind
when reachable, else fall back to
.B mempool
with a warn line.
.TP
.B backend chain-height
Current chain-tip height as an integer.
.TP
.B backend get-address-utxos \fIaddress\fR
UTXOs at
.I address
as backend-native JSON.
.TP
.B backend broadcast \fIhex\fR
POST a raw transaction; print the txid.
.TP
.B backend estimate-fee \fR[\fItarget-blocks\fR]
Recommended sat/vB for confirmation within
.I target-blocks
(default 3). Mempool buckets: 1 (fastest), 3 (half-hour),
6 (hour), 144 (economy), else minimum.

.SS PSBT (BIP-174)
.TP
.B psbt decode
Read a PSBT (hex) from stdin and emit one TSV line per
key-value record:
.IR "section=<n> type=<hex> key=<hex> value=<hex>" .
.TP
.B psbt encode
Reverse of
.BR "psbt decode" .
Read TSV records on stdin and emit a hex PSBT, inserting
section terminators where the section field advances.
.TP
.B psbt sign \fIprivkey-hex\fR
Read a PSBT from stdin and sign every v0 P2WPKH input whose
WITNESS_UTXO scriptPubKey matches HASH160(pubkey of
.IR privkey-hex ).
SIGHASH_ALL only; ECDSA via openssl over secp256k1;
signatures are BIP-66 low-S canonicalised.
.TP
.B psbt finalize
Promote PARTIAL_SIG records to FINAL_SCRIPTWITNESS per
BIP-174 \(sc Finalizer.
.TP
.B psbt extract
Emit the broadcastable BIP-141 + BIP-144 segwit raw tx from a
finalised PSBT.

.SS Wallet (FEAT-010, FEAT-013, FEAT-014)
.TP
.B wallet new \fIname\fR
Create a new wallet at
.IR $XDG_DATA_HOME/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/ .
Generates a BIP-39 mnemonic and stores it via
.BR "secret put <name>/seed" .
.TP
.B wallet ls
List existing wallets.
.TP
.B wallet rm \fR[\fB-f\fR] \fIname\fR
Remove a wallet.
.B -f
also removes the seed via
.BR "secret rm" .
.TP
.B wallet derive \fIname\fR
Derive the next BIP-84 receive address (
.IR m/84h/0h/0h/0/i )
and append it to the wallet's ledger.
.TP
.B wallet addresses \fIname\fR
List every derived address with its index and label.
.TP
.B wallet label \fIname\fR \fIaddress\fR \fItext\fR
Set or clear the label on a derived address.
.TP
.B wallet balance \fIname\fR
Sum UTXO values for every derived address via the active
backend.
.TP
.B wallet build \fIname\fR \fIaddress\fR \fIsats\fR \fR[\fB--fee-rate\fR \fIN\fR]
Build an unsigned PSBT paying
.I sats
to
.I address.
Without
.BR --fee-rate ,
reads the active backend's
.BR "estimate-fee 3"
recommendation, falling back to 1 sat/vB on failure.
P2WPKH / P2WSH outputs only.
.TP
.B wallet sign \fIname\fR
Read a PSBT on stdin, derive a private key for every address
in the wallet's ledger, pipe the PSBT through
.B psbt sign
once per key.
.TP
.B wallet send \fIname\fR \fIaddress\fR \fIsats\fR \fR[\fB--fee-rate\fR \fIN\fR]
End-to-end:
.BR "wallet build" " | " "wallet sign" " | " "psbt finalize"
.BR | " psbt extract" " | " "wallet broadcast" .
Prints the txid.
.TP
.B wallet broadcast \fIname\fR
Read raw transaction hex from stdin; POST it via the active
backend.
.TP
.B wallet remote add \fIname\fR \fIremote\fR \fIurl\fR
Set / replace a git remote on the wallet repository so the
wallet can be pushed between machines.
.TP
.B wallet push \fIname\fR \fR[\fIremote\fR]
.B git push
the wallet repository.
.TP
.B wallet pull \fIname\fR \fR[\fIremote\fR]
.B git pull --rebase
the wallet repository.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enable shell tracing for any
.B bitcoin
process.
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppress info-level log lines.
.TP
.B SELF_LIBEXEC
Override the libexec directory used to find BIP plugins.
.TP
.B BITCOIN_BACKEND
Override the active backend for this shell (
.BR mempool ,
.BR bitcoind ,
.BR blockstream ).
Takes precedence over
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/bitcoin/backend .
.TP
.B BITCOIN_MEMPOOL_URL
Base URL for the mempool.space backend (default
.IR https://mempool.space ).
.TP
.B BIP39_PASSPHRASE
Optional BIP-39 passphrase consumed by
.BR mnemonic-to-seed .
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Wallet repositories live under
.IR $XDG_DATA_HOME/bitcoin/wallets/ .
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Backend selection persists in
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/bitcoin/backend .
.TP
.B XDG_SHARE_HOME
The BIP-39 wordlist is read from
.IR $XDG_SHARE_HOME/bitcoin/bip39/<lang>.txt .

.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/bitcoin/wallets/<name>/
Per-wallet git repository: config, descriptors, addresses
ledger.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/bitcoin/backend
Active backend (one line, one name).
.TP
.I share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-NNNN.mediawiki
Vendored BIP source documents (FEAT-017).
.TP
.I libexec/bitcoin/<plugin>
Per-BIP plugin script.

.SH EXIT STATUS
Zero on success; non-zero on failure. Every failure branch
emits at least one
.IR warn / error / fatal
line on stderr that names the condition and the offending
value (per
.IR skills/logging.md ).

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
The cold-signing flow:
.PP
.RS
.EX
$ bitcoin wallet new alice
$ bitcoin wallet derive alice
bc1q...
$ # (fund the address from a faucet, wait for a confirmation)
$ bitcoin wallet balance alice
100000
$ bitcoin wallet send alice bc1qrecipientaddr... 50000
<txid>
.EE
.RE

.PP
The same flow split across two machines (hot-build, cold-sign):
.PP
.RS
.EX
hot$  bitcoin wallet build alice bc1qrecipient 50000 > tx.psbt
cold$ bitcoin wallet sign  alice < tx.psbt | bitcoin psbt finalize > signed.psbt
hot$  bitcoin psbt extract < signed.psbt | bitcoin wallet broadcast alice
.EE
.RE

.SH STANDARDS
Each subcommand cites its underlying BIP via
.BR "bitcoin help <subcommand>" .
The vendored specifications live under
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/ :

.TP
.B BIP-13 (P2SH addresses)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0013.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0013.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-32 (HD wallets)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0032.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-39 (mnemonic seed phrases)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0039.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-141 (segwit)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki
.UE
\(em consumed by
.B wallet build
+
.BR "psbt extract" .
.TP
.B BIP-143 (segwit sighash)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0143.mediawiki
.UE
\(em consumed by
.BR "psbt sign" .
.TP
.B BIP-173 (bech32 segwit addresses)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0173.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-174 (PSBT)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0174.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0174.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-350 (bech32m for v1+ segwit)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0350.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-380 (output descriptors)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0380.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0380.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-381 (non-segwit descriptors)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0381.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0381.mediawiki .
.TP
.B BIP-386 (tr() descriptors)
.UR https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0386.mediawiki
.UE
\(em local:
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/bips/bip-0386.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR account (1),
.BR secret (1),
.BR lightning (1),
.BR bitcoind (8).

.SH BUGS
Report at
.UR https://github.com/nostra124/bitcoin/issues
.UE .
