.\" Manpage for bitcoin-backend(1) — RPC backend selection.
.TH BITCOIN-BACKEND 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-backend \- select and query the chain-data backend

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin backend
.RI [ "view " | " set " name " | " auto " | " name ]
.br
.B bitcoin backend chain-height
.br
.B bitcoin backend get-address-utxos
.I address
.br
.B bitcoin backend get-address-txs
.I address
.br
.B bitcoin backend broadcast
.I tx_hex
.br
.B bitcoin backend estimate-fee
.RI [ blocks ]
.br
.B bitcoin backend help

.SH OPTIONS
.B bitcoin backend
takes no top-level flags. Per-subcommand semantics are documented
under SUBCOMMANDS below. The dispatcher honors
.B $SELF_DEBUG
and
.B $SELF_QUIET
inherited from
.BR bitcoin (1).

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bitcoin backend
abstracts the chain-data source. Three backends are scaffolded:
.BR mempool " (mempool.space REST API),"
.BR bitcoind " (local Bitcoin Core JSON-RPC), and"
.BR blockstream " (blockstream.info REST API)."
Only the mempool implementation is wired in this release; calling
the others' verbs returns a clear "not implemented" error.

The "active backend" is, in priority order, the
.B BITCOIN_BACKEND
environment variable, the file
.IR ~/.config/bitcoin/backend ,
or the built-in default
.BR mempool .

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B view (default)
Print the active backend's name.
.TP
.BI "set " name
Set the active backend (writes
.IR ~/.config/bitcoin/backend ).
.B name
is one of
.BR mempool ", " bitcoind ", " blockstream .
.TP
.B auto
Pick
.B bitcoind
if reachable locally, else fall back to
.BR mempool .
.TP
.I name
Shorthand for
.BI "set " name "."
.TP
.B chain-height
Print the current chain-tip height as an integer.
.TP
.BI "get-address-utxos " address
Print UTXOs at
.I address
as backend-native JSON.
.TP
.BI "get-address-txs " address
Print every tx touching
.I address
as a backend-native JSON array. Used by
.B bitcoin wallet index
(FEAT-018) to build the wallet's local history.
.TP
.BI "broadcast " tx_hex
POST a raw transaction; print the broadcast txid.
.TP
.BR "estimate-fee " [ blocks ]
Print recommended sat/vB for confirmation in
.I blocks
(default 3). Buckets used by the mempool backend:
.B 1
(fastest),
.B 3
(half-hour),
.B 6
(hour),
.B 144
(economy), else (minimum).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B \(>=1
Backend error. Specific errors emit a
.B warn
or
.B error
line to stderr per CLAUDE.md §10, naming the failing backend.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/bitcoin/backend
Persists the active backend name (one of
.BR mempool ", " bitcoind ", " blockstream ).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BITCOIN_BACKEND
Highest-priority override for the active backend. One of
.BR mempool ", " bitcoind ", " blockstream .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-daemon (1),
.BR bitcoin-wallet (1)

.SH HISTORY
Verb introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).
