.\" Manpage for bitcoin-mnemonic-to-seed(1) — PBKDF2 seed derivation.
.TH BITCOIN-MNEMONIC-TO-SEED 1 "2026-05-21" "bitcoin 1.22.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
bitcoin\-mnemonic\-to\-seed \- derive a binary BIP-39 seed from a mnemonic

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitcoin mnemonic-to-seed
.RI [ word " ...]"
.br
echo
.RI "\"" word " ...\" |"
.B bitcoin mnemonic-to-seed
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads a BIP-39 mnemonic from positional arguments (or from the
first stdin line if no words are given on the command line),
applies PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA512 with the BIP-39 §From mnemonic to seed
parameters, and writes the 64-byte binary seed to stdout.

The salt is the literal string
.B "mnemonic"
concatenated with the contents of
.BR $BIP39_PASSPHRASE
(empty by default). 2048 iterations; SHA-512 digest; 64-byte
output.

Output is binary on stdout. Pipe it into
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1)
.B create
to obtain a master extended key.

.SH OPTIONS
This command takes no options. All BIP-39 parameters are fixed by
the specification.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 2
No mnemonic provided (no argv words and stdin is a terminal).
.TP
.B 3
Stdin closed before a mnemonic could be read.
.TP
.B 4
Word count not one of 12, 15, 18, 21, 24.
.TP
.B 5
.B openssl
PBKDF2 invocation failed (need openssl \(>= 3.0 with the
.B kdf
subcommand).

.SH FILES
None. The plugin is stateless.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BIP39_PASSPHRASE
Optional passphrase concatenated to the
.B "mnemonic"
salt. Empty by default.
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enables shell trace
.RB ( "set -vx" ).

.SH STANDARDS
.IP \(bu 2
BIP-39 §From mnemonic to seed, shipped at
.IR share/doc/bitcoin/standards/bip-0039.mediawiki .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip32 (1),
.BR bitcoin-bip39 (1),
.BR openssl-kdf (1)

.SH HISTORY
Plugin introduced in bitcoin 1.0.0. Man page added in 1.23.0
(FEAT-041).

In a future release the standalone
.B mnemonic-to-seed
verb will fold into
.B bitcoin bip39 mnemonic-to-seed
(FEAT-035, target 1.23.0+); the standalone name will remain as a
deprecated alias for one release after the fold.
