.TH FORGEJO-NODE 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
forgejo-node \- install and operate a Forgejo Git forge and its CI runners
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B forgejo-node
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B forgejo-node
installs and operates
.B Forgejo
(https://forgejo.org/), a lightweight self-hostable Git forge \(em a
community fork of Gitea \(em together with its CI runners
.RB ( "Forgejo Actions" ).
.PP
The command is a thin dispatcher: each verb maps to an executable under
.IR libexec/forgejo-node/ .
Two verbs carry the weight:
.B daemon
manages the Forgejo server, and
.B runner
installs and registers Actions runners for specific platforms
.RB ( docker / lxc / host ).
.PP
Following the daemon posture in the stack
.RB ( CLAUDE.md " \(sc1),"
the server runs system-mode under a dedicated
.B git
account, with
.I /var/lib/forgejo
for data and
.I /etc/forgejo/app.ini
for config. The web UI binds 127.0.0.1:3000; front it with a reverse
proxy for TLS.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B version
Print the package version.
.TP
.B daemon " " \fIsubcommand\fR
Lifecycle and setup of the Forgejo server. See
.BR forgejo-node-daemon (1).
.TP
.B runner " " \fIsubcommand\fR
Install, register, and operate Forgejo Actions runners by platform. See
.BR forgejo-node-runner (1).
.TP
.B help
Print the top-level help.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Bring up a server and a docker-backed runner:
.PP
.RS
.nf
forgejo-node daemon install
forgejo-node daemon enable && forgejo-node daemon start
forgejo-node runner install
forgejo-node runner register --instance http://127.0.0.1:3000 \\
    --token <tok> --platform docker
forgejo-node runner enable && forgejo-node runner start
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR forgejo-node-daemon (1),
.BR forgejo-node-runner (1)
.br
https://forgejo.org/docs/
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in the decentral-nodes stack alongside the other Tier 3
self-hosting nodes.
