.TH FORGEJO-NODE-DAEMON 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
forgejo-node-daemon \- install and operate a boot-persistent Forgejo server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B forgejo-node daemon
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Render a platform-appropriate service unit (systemd on Linux, launchd on
macOS), install it, and operate the Forgejo web server. The service runs
system-mode under a dedicated
.B git
account (the account name Forgejo expects for SSH access), with a
.I /var/lib/forgejo
data directory and an
.I /etc/forgejo/app.ini
config.
.PP
The web UI binds 127.0.0.1:3000 by default. First-run setup
(database choice, admin user) is completed in the browser; place a reverse
proxy in front for TLS and a public hostname.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B install
Download the Forgejo server binary for this OS/arch to
.I /usr/local/bin/forgejo
from the official Codeberg release. Set
.B FORGEJO_VERSION
to pin a specific version.
.TP
.B enable
Provision the
.B git
account and the data/config directories, install the service unit, and
register it to start at boot. Requires root.
.TP
.B disable
Stop the service and remove its unit. The data directory under
.I /var/lib/forgejo
is preserved.
.TP
.BR start / stop / restart
Drive the installed service.
.TP
.B status
Report whether Forgejo is running, plus the binary version.
.TP
.B monitor
Tail the daemon log.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/forgejo
The server binary.
.TP
.I /etc/forgejo/app.ini
Service configuration.
.TP
.I /var/lib/forgejo
Data directory (repositories, database when SQLite, logs).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B FORGEJO_VERSION
Version to download in
.BR install " (default: a pinned recent release)."
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR forgejo-node (1),
.BR forgejo-node-runner (1)
.br
https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/installation/binary/
.SH HISTORY
Introduced alongside
.BR forgejo-node (1).
