.TH FORGEJO-NODE-RUNNER 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
forgejo-node-runner \- install and operate Forgejo Actions runners by platform
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B forgejo-node runner
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Install, register, and operate
.B Forgejo Actions
runners. A runner advertises its capabilities to the Forgejo instance
through
.IR labels ;
each label binds a friendly name to an execution backend. This command's
job is to make wiring up runners for
.I specific platforms
straightforward via presets.
.SH PLATFORMS
.TP
.B docker
Jobs run in throwaway OCI containers. Labels:
.IR "docker:docker://node:20-bookworm" ", " "ubuntu-latest:docker://..." .
Requires docker or podman on the runner host.
.TP
.B lxc
Jobs run in LXC system containers. Labels:
.IR "lxc:lxc://debian:bookworm" ", " "self-hosted:lxc://..." .
Requires lxc and the runner's lxc backend.
.TP
.B host
Jobs run directly on the host with no isolation. Labels:
.IR "host:host" ", " "self-hosted:host" .
Use only for trusted repositories.
.PP
Override the preset images with
.B FORGEJO_RUNNER_IMAGE
(docker base image) and
.B FORGEJO_RUNNER_LXC
(lxc distro), or pass an explicit
.B \-\-labels
list.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B install
Download the
.I forgejo-runner
binary to
.I /usr/local/bin/forgejo-runner
from the official release. Set
.B FORGEJO_RUNNER_VERSION
to pin a version.
.TP
.B platforms
Print the platform label presets and what each requires.
.TP
.BI "register " "[options]"
Register a runner against an instance. Options:
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-instance " URL"
Forgejo instance base URL (required).
.TP
.BI \-\-token " TOKEN"
Registration token from the instance (Site/Repo/Org \(-> Actions \(->
Runners) (required).
.TP
.BI \-\-platform " docker|lxc|host"
Apply a label preset (default:
.BR docker ).
.TP
.BI \-\-labels " a:b://c,..."
Explicit label list (overrides
.BR \-\-platform ).
.TP
.BI \-\-name " NAME"
Runner name (default: hostname).
.RE
.TP
.B generate-config
Write a default runner
.I config.yaml
to
.IR /etc/forgejo-runner/config.yaml .
.TP
.B enable
Provision the
.B forgejo-runner
account and work directory, install the service unit, and register it to
start at boot. For the docker preset, the account is added to the
.B docker
group when present.
.TP
.B disable
Stop the service and remove its unit. The work directory is preserved.
.TP
.BR start / stop / restart
Drive the installed runner daemon.
.TP
.B status
Report whether the runner is running.
.TP
.B monitor
Tail the runner log (via journald when available).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/forgejo-runner
The runner binary.
.TP
.I /etc/forgejo-runner/config.yaml
Runner configuration.
.TP
.I /var/lib/forgejo-runner
Work directory (holds the
.I .runner
credential).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B FORGEJO_RUNNER_VERSION
Version to download in
.BR install .
.TP
.BR FORGEJO_RUNNER_IMAGE ", " FORGEJO_RUNNER_LXC
Override the docker/lxc preset images.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR forgejo-node (1),
.BR forgejo-node-daemon (1)
.br
https://forgejo.org/docs/latest/admin/actions/
.SH HISTORY
Introduced alongside
.BR forgejo-node (1).
