.TH FULCRUM 1 "2026" "bitcoin stack" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
fulcrum \- manage a Fulcrum Electrum server alongside bitcoin
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fulcrum
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fulcrum
is a peer command to
.BR bitcoin (1),
shipped from the same package. It stands up, configures, inspects, and
moderates a Fulcrum Electrum server that indexes the local bitcoind.
Fulcrum is an independent daemon, not a wallet feature \(em hence a
separate top-level command sharing one package and one version.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Server lifecycle (FEAT-056, FEAT-307)
Daemon lifecycle verbs are invoked as
.BI "fulcrum daemon " verb
(harmonized across the stack \(em bitcoin / lightning / fulcrum / monero all
use
.BI "<cmd> daemon " verb ).
.B install
stays a top-level verb.
.TP
.B install " [--from brew|apt|source|docker]"
Install the Fulcrum server binary.
.TP
.B daemon enable " [--system|--user]"
Render and install a systemd/launchd unit and start the server.
.B --system
(default) runs Fulcrum as a dedicated
.B fulcrum
account (needs root);
.B --user
is the explicit opt-in for a rootless per-user service. Fails
if the local bitcoind RPC is unreachable.
.TP
.B daemon disable " [--system|--user]"
Stop the service and remove its unit; the index is preserved.
.TP
.BR "daemon start" ", " "daemon stop" ", " "daemon monitor" " [--system|--user]"
Start, stop, or follow the running service.
.TP
.B daemon status " [--system|--user]"
Report whether the Fulcrum server is reachable (admin RPC) and its synced
height \(em no sudo.
.TP
.B daemon space " [--system|--user]"
Show the Fulcrum index disk usage.
.SS Configuration (FEAT-057)
.TP
.B config init " [--ssl|--no-ssl]"
Write a curated
.I fulcrum.conf
wired to the local node (cookie auth by default, or rpcuser/rpcpassword
from the secret store when rpcauth is configured).
.TP
.BR "config show" ", " "config get " \fIkey\fR ", " "config set " "\fIkey val\fR"
Inspect or edit a curated allow-list of keys.
.TP
.B config validate
Check node reachability, cert presence, and free ports.
.TP
.B cert " [--force]"
Generate the self-signed TLS cert+key the SSL port requires.
.SS Admin inspection (FEAT-058)
.TP
.BR info ", " sync ", " stats ", " clients ", " "logs [-f]"
Query the Fulcrum admin port: server info, sync progress vs the node
tip, raw stats, connected clients, and the service journal.
.SS Admin moderation (FEAT-060)
.TP
.BR peers ", " "addpeer " \fIhost\fR ", " "rmpeer " \fIhost\fR
List and manage peers.
.TP
.BR "ban " \fIid|ip\fR ", " "unban " \fIip\fR ", " banlist ", " "kick " \fIid|ip\fR
Ban, unban, list bans, and disconnect clients.
.TP
.B loglevel " normal|debug|trace"
Set the server's runtime log verbosity.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.fulcrum/fulcrum.conf
Default per-user configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.fulcrum
Default per-user index data directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR lightning (1)
.SH HISTORY
Added in the 2.1.0 release (FEAT-055..058, FEAT-060).
