.TH MONERO 1 "2026" "bitcoin stack" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
monero \- manage a Monero node alongside bitcoin
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B monero
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B monero
is a peer command to
.BR bitcoin (1),
shipped from the same package (one rpk identity, many commands). It
installs, runs, and configures a Monero node
.RB ( monerod ).
Monero is an independent chain and daemon, not a wallet feature \(em
hence a separate top-level command sharing one package and one version.
.PP
The 3.2.0 milestone ships the node surface (install / daemon / config);
the wallet and decentralized-mining surfaces land in later releases.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Enable debug output.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode (suppress info lines).
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Generic
.TP
.B help " [command]"
Show help, optionally for a specific command.
.TP
.B version
Print the version (the same string as
.BR "bitcoin version" ).
.TP
.B modules
List the available libexec plugins.
.SS Node
.TP
.B install " [--from release] [--version V] [--prefix DIR] [--force]"
Install the official monerod binaries from a verified getmonero.org
release tarball. See
.BR monero-install (1).
.TP
.B daemon " <enable|disable|start|stop|status|monitor|space>"
Install and operate a boot-persistent monerod service. See
.BR monero-daemon (1).
.TP
.B config " <list|get|set|unset|path>"
View and edit the effective monerod configuration. See
.BR monero-config (1).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/monero/monerod.conf
System-service configuration (\-\-system mode).
.TP
.I /var/lib/monero
System-service data directory.
.TP
.I ~/.bitmonero
Per-user data directory (\-\-user mode).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MONERO_VERSION
Pin the release version installed by
.BR "monero install" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success; non-zero on error (each failure prints a
.I warn
or
.I error
line naming the condition).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR monero-install (1),
.BR monero-daemon (1),
.BR monero-config (1),
.BR bitcoin (1),
.BR lightning (1)
.PP
Walkthrough:
.I docs/monero-walkthrough.md
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in the 3.2.0 milestone (FEAT-299..303).
