.TH MONERO-CONFIG 1 "2026" "bitcoin stack" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
monero-config \- view and edit the effective monerod configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B monero config
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
A thin front end over
.IR monerod.conf .
The
.I effective
configuration is the value present in the config file, otherwise monerod's
compiled-in default (parsed from
.BR "monerod --help" ).
The config lives under
.I /etc/monero
for the system service (FHS). Writes route through
.B sudo
+
.B install -m 0640
preserving the owner:group, so the operator reads while a privileged step
does the write.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B list " [--set]"
Print
.IR NAME <TAB> VALUE <TAB> DESCRIPTION
for every monerod option \(em
.I VALUE
is the config value if set, else the compiled-in default.
.B \-\-set
limits output to keys explicitly present in the config file.
.TP
.B get " <key>"
Print the effective value of
.IR key .
.TP
.B set " <key> <value>"
Write
.I key=value
into the config (replacing any existing line) and warn that a restart is
needed.
.TP
.B unset " <key>"
Remove
.IR key ,
reverting it to monerod's default.
.TP
.B path
Print the path to
.IR monerod.conf .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-set
With
.BR list ,
show only keys explicitly set in the config file.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MONERO_CONFIG_DIR
Directory holding
.I monerod.conf
(overrides the default).
.TP
.B MONERO_MONEROD
monerod binary used to parse compiled-in defaults.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success;
.B 2
on a usage error;
.B 1
when a key is unknown / unset and has no default.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR monero (1),
.BR monero-daemon (1)
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in 3.2.0 (FEAT-302).
