.TH MONERO-INSTALL 1 "2026" "bitcoin stack" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
monero-install \- verified release-tarball install of the Monero binaries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B monero install
.RB [ \-\-from
.IR release ]
.RB [ \-\-version
.IR vX.Y.Z.W ]
.RB [ \-\-prefix
.IR DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Fetch the official Monero release tarball from getmonero.org for the host
architecture and authenticate it before staging anything (fail-closed):
.IP 1. 4
resolve the host arch to a release asset
.RB ( monero-linux-x64 ,
.BR monero-linux-armv8 ,
.BR monero-mac-x64 / -armv8 )
and the pinned version;
.IP 2. 4
fetch the maintainer (binaryFate) signing key on first use and reject it
unless its fingerprint matches the pinned one (cached thereafter);
.IP 3. 4
.B gpg \-\-verify
the clearsigned hashes file with that key;
.IP 4. 4
check the tarball SHA256 against the verified hashes;
.IP 5. 4
extract
.BR monerod ,
.BR monero-wallet-rpc ,
and
.B monero-wallet-cli
into the install bindir.
.PP
Any verification failure aborts with a non-zero exit and nothing staged.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-from " release"
Install source. Only
.I release
is supported today (the default).
.TP
.BI \-\-version " vX.Y.Z.W"
Install a specific release instead of the pinned default.
.TP
.BI \-\-prefix " DIR"
Install into
.I DIR
instead of the autodetected bindir
.RI ( /usr/local/bin ,
.IR /opt/local/bin ,
.IR /opt/homebrew/bin ).
.TP
.B \-\-force
Re-install even if the target version is already present.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MONERO_VERSION
Override the pinned release version.
.TP
.B MONERO_KEY_URL ", " MONERO_HASHES_URL ", " MONERO_RELEASE_BASEURL
Override the signing-key, hashes, and tarball sources (testing seams).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success;
.B 1
on a download / verification / extraction failure (nothing staged).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR monero (1),
.BR monero-daemon (1)
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in 3.2.0 (FEAT-300).
