.TH MONERO-DAEMON 1 "2026" "bitcoin stack" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
monero-daemon \- install and operate a boot-persistent monerod service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B monero daemon
.I subcommand
.RB [ \-\-user | \-\-system ]
.RB [ \-\-mainnet | \-\-stagenet | \-\-testnet ]
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Render a platform-appropriate service unit (systemd on Linux, launchd on
macOS), install it, and operate the monerod process. The default mode is
.B \-\-system
\(em a boot-persistent service under a dedicated
.RB ( _monero / monero )
account, with a
.I /var/lib/monero
data directory and
.I /etc/monero
config. Pass
.B \-\-user
for the rootless per-user service.
.PP
monerod runs with restricted RPC bound to 127.0.0.1. The
.BR \-\-stagenet / \-\-testnet
flags install a distinctly-labelled parallel service that coexists with the
mainnet one.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B enable " [--user] [--stagenet|--testnet] [--prune]"
Provision the account/group + data dir, generate the restricted-RPC config
(adding
.B prune-blockchain
when
.BR \-\-prune ),
install the unit, and start it.
.B \-\-system
(default) needs root;
.B \-\-user
is the rootless opt-in. Refuses if the restricted-RPC port is already in
use rather than installing a unit that would crash-loop on bind.
.TP
.B disable " [--user] [--stagenet|--testnet]"
Stop the service and remove its unit (data directory preserved).
.TP
.B start " / " stop
Drive the installed service (mode auto-detected).
.TP
.B status
Report whether monerod is reachable, and its height — current/target while syncing (like bitcoin).
Reads via group access \(em no sudo prompt.
.TP
.B monitor
Tail the daemon log directly (group-read; no sudo).
.TP
.B space
Report the data-directory disk usage.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-user
Rootless per-user service (opt-in).
.TP
.B \-\-system
Boot-persistent system service (default).
.TP
.B \-\-stagenet ", " \-\-testnet
Target a non-mainnet network (parallel, suffixed unit).
.TP
.B \-\-prune
Run a pruned node
.RB ( prune-blockchain ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/monero/monerod.conf
System-service config (per-network suffix for stagenet/testnet).
.TP
.I /var/lib/monero
System data dir;
.I ~/.bitmonero
in \-\-user mode.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MONERO_MONEROD
Path to the monerod binary (overrides autodetection).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success; non-zero on error (each failure names the condition).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR monero (1),
.BR monero-install (1),
.BR monero-config (1)
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in 3.2.0 (FEAT-301).
