.TH USERMIN-NODE-DAEMON 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
usermin-node-daemon \- install and operate the Usermin service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usermin-node daemon
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Install Usermin from the official signed repository and drive its systemd
service. Usermin serves HTTPS on 127.0.0.1:20000; its miniserv starts as
root to authenticate local accounts and then runs each session as the
logged-in user (no host administration \(em that is Webmin). Linux only
(apt/dnf).
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "install " "[--from auto|apt|dnf]"
Fetch the upstream
.I setup-repos.sh
to configure the signed Webmin/Usermin repo, then install the
.B usermin
package. With
.B --from auto
(the default) the package manager is detected (apt-get, then dnf).
.TP
.B enable
Enable the
.B usermin
service to start at boot
.RB ( "systemctl enable usermin" ).
.TP
.B disable
Stop the service and disable it at boot. The
.I /etc/usermin
config is preserved.
.TP
.BR start / stop / restart
Drive the installed service.
.TP
.B status
Report whether Usermin is running, plus the installed version.
.TP
.B monitor
Tail the miniserv log (or the journal when no log file is present).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/usermin
Usermin programs and module libraries.
.TP
.I /etc/usermin
Configuration
.RI ( miniserv.conf ", " miniserv.users ).
.TP
.I /var/log/usermin/miniserv.log
Server log.
.SH SECURITY
Usermin exposes per-user mail and file access over HTTPS. Keep port
20000 firewalled to trusted networks, restrict
.I miniserv.conf
.B allow=
to known hosts, and prefer a reverse proxy with strong auth for any
non-local access.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR usermin-node (1),
.BR webmin-node-daemon (1)
.br
https://www.webmin.com/usermin.html
.SH HISTORY
Introduced alongside
.BR usermin-node (1).
