.TH USERMIN-NODE 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
usermin-node \- install and operate a Usermin web interface service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usermin-node
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B usermin-node
installs and operates
.B Usermin
(https://www.webmin.com/usermin.html), Webmin's per-user sibling: a
simplified web interface where ordinary (non-root) accounts read mail,
change their password, manage SSH keys, edit home-directory files, and
set up cron. It shares Webmin's mini HTTPS server
.RB ( miniserv.pl )
but listens on port 20000.
.PP
The command is a thin dispatcher: each verb maps to an executable under
.IR libexec/usermin-node/ .
The
.B daemon
verb carries the weight (install + lifecycle).
.PP
Usermin's miniserv starts as root to authenticate any local account,
then drops to that user for the session \(em so end users get only their
own files and mail, not host administration. Pair it with
.BR webmin-node (1)
for the root administration UI. Restrict access with the firewall and/or
.I miniserv.conf
.B allow=
rules, and front it with a reverse proxy for a public hostname. Usermin
is packaged for Linux (apt/dnf) only; macOS is not supported by this
node.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B version
Print the package version.
.TP
.B daemon " " \fIsubcommand\fR
Install and run the Usermin service. See
.BR usermin-node-daemon (1).
.TP
.B help
Print the top-level help.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS
.nf
usermin-node daemon install
usermin-node daemon enable && usermin-node daemon start
# then open https://127.0.0.1:20000
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR usermin-node-daemon (1),
.BR webmin-node (1)
.br
https://www.webmin.com/usermin.html
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in the decentral-nodes stack alongside the other Tier 3
self-hosting nodes.
