.TH WEBMIN-NODE-DAEMON 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
webmin-node-daemon \- install and operate the Webmin service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B webmin-node daemon
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Install Webmin from its official signed repository and drive its systemd
service. Webmin runs
.B as root
(it administers the host) and serves HTTPS on 127.0.0.1:10000; there is
no dedicated service account. Linux only (apt/dnf).
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.BI "install " "[--from auto|apt|dnf]"
Fetch the upstream
.I setup-repos.sh
to configure the signed Webmin repo, then install the
.B webmin
package. With
.B --from auto
(the default) the package manager is detected (apt-get, then dnf).
.TP
.B enable
Enable the
.B webmin
service to start at boot
.RB ( "systemctl enable webmin" ).
.TP
.B disable
Stop the service and disable it at boot. The
.I /etc/webmin
config is preserved.
.TP
.BR start / stop / restart
Drive the installed service.
.TP
.B status
Report whether Webmin is running, plus the installed version.
.TP
.B monitor
Tail the miniserv log (or the journal when no log file is present).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/webmin
Webmin programs and module libraries.
.TP
.I /etc/webmin
Configuration
.RI ( miniserv.conf ", " miniserv.users ).
.TP
.I /var/log/webmin/miniserv.log
Server log.
.SH SECURITY
Webmin exposes full root administration over HTTPS. Keep port 10000
firewalled to trusted networks, restrict
.I miniserv.conf
.B allow=
to known hosts, and prefer a reverse proxy with strong auth for any
non-local access.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR webmin-node (1)
.br
https://www.webmin.com/docs/
.SH HISTORY
Introduced alongside
.BR webmin-node (1).
