.TH WEBMIN-NODE 1 "2026" "decentral-nodes" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
webmin-node \- install and operate a Webmin web administration service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B webmin-node
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B webmin-node
installs and operates
.B Webmin
(https://www.webmin.com/), a browser-based system administration UI for
Unix/Linux \(em manage users, groups, packages, services, cron, the
firewall, and module UIs (Apache, BIND, MySQL/PostgreSQL, Samba, …) from
a web browser. Webmin ships its own mini HTTPS server
.RB ( miniserv.pl )
on port 10000.
.PP
The command is a thin dispatcher: each verb maps to an executable under
.IR libexec/webmin-node/ .
The
.B daemon
verb carries the weight (install + lifecycle).
.PP
Unlike the other nodes, Webmin runs
.B as root
\(em it administers the host \(em so there is no dedicated service
account. Restrict access with the firewall and/or
.I miniserv.conf
.B allow=
rules, and front it with a reverse proxy for a public hostname. Webmin
is packaged for Linux (apt/dnf) only; macOS is not supported by this
node.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B version
Print the package version.
.TP
.B daemon " " \fIsubcommand\fR
Install and run the Webmin service. See
.BR webmin-node-daemon (1).
.TP
.B help
Print the top-level help.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS
.nf
webmin-node daemon install
webmin-node daemon enable && webmin-node daemon start
# then open https://127.0.0.1:10000
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR webmin-node-daemon (1)
.br
https://www.webmin.com/
.SH HISTORY
Introduced in the decentral-nodes stack alongside the other Tier 3
self-hosting nodes.
